### 6.33


arjuna uvāca

yo ’yaṁ yogas tvayā proktaḥ

sāmyena madhusūdana

etasyāhaṁ na paśyāmi

cañcalatvāt sthitiṁ sthirām

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; yaḥ—the system; ayam—this; yogaḥ—mysticism; tvayā—by
You; proktaḥ—described; sāmyena—generally; madhusūdana—O killer of the demon
Madhu; etasya—of this; aham—I; na—do not; paśyāmi—see; cañcalatvāt—due to being
restless; sthitim—situation; sthirām—stable.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: O Madhusūdana, the system of yoga which you have summarized appears
impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is restless and unsteady.

**PURPORT**

The system of mysticism described by Lord Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna beginning with the
words śucau deśe and ending with yogī paramaḥ is here being rejected by Arjuna
out of a feeling of inability. It is not possible for an ordinary man to leave
home and go to a secluded place in the mountains or jungles to practice yoga in
this age of Kali. The present age is characterized by a bitter struggle for a
life of short duration. People are not serious about self-realization even by
simple, practical means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which
regulates the mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, and
detachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man, Arjuna
thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even though he was
favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royal family and was highly
elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was a great warrior, he had great
longevity, and, above all, he was the most intimate friend of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Five thousand years ago, Arjuna had much better
facilities then we do now, yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In
fact, we do not find any record in history of his practicing it at any time.
Therefore this system must be considered generally impossible in this age of
Kali. Of course it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for the
people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five thousand
years ago, then what of the present day? Those who are imitating this yoga
system in different so-called schools and societies, although complacent, are
certainly wasting their time. They are completely in ignorance of the desired
goal.

### 6.34


cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

pramāthi balavad dṛḍham

tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye

vāyor iva su-duṣkaram

cañcalam—flickering; hi—certainly; manaḥ—mind; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa;
pramāthi—agitating; balavat—strong; dṛḍham—obstinate; tasya—its; aham—I;
nigraham—subduing; manye—think; vāyoḥ—of the wind; iva—like;
suduṣkaram—difficult.

**TRANSLATION**

For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Kṛṣṇa, and to
subdue it is, it seems to me, more difficult than controlling the wind.

**PURPORT**

The mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although mind is supposed to be subservient to the intelligence.
For a man in the practical world who has to fight so many opposing elements, it
is certainly very difficult to control the mind. Artificially, one may establish
a mental equilibrium toward both friend and enemy, but ultimately no worldly man
can do so, for this is more difficult than controlling the raging wind. In the
Vedic literatures it is said:

ātmānaṁ rathinaṁ viddhi śarīraṁ ratham eva ca buddhintu sārathiṁ viddhi manaḥ
pragraham eva ca indriyāṇi hayānāhur viṣayāṁs teṣu gocarān ātmendriya-mano-yukto
bhoktety āhur manīṣiṇaḥ.

“The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and the senses are
the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in the association of the
mind and senses. So it is understood by great thinkers.” Intelligence is
supposed to direct the mind, but the mind is so strong and obstinate that it
often overcomes even one’s own intelligence. Such a strong mind is supposed to
be controlled by the practice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for
a worldly person like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile used
here is appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it is even more
difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way to control the mind, as
suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting “Hare Kṛṣṇa,” the great mantra for
deliverance, in all humility. The method prescribed is sa vai manaḥ
kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ: one must engage one’s mind fully in Kṛṣṇa. Only then will
there remain no other engagements to agitate the mind.

### 6.35


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

asaṁśayaṁ mahā-bāho

mano durnigrahaṁ calam

abhyāsena tu kaunteya

vairāgyeṇa ca gṛhyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Personality of Godhead said; asaṁśayam—undoubtedly;
mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; manaḥ—mind; durnigraham—difficult to curb;
calam—flickering; abhyāsena—by practice; tu—but; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
vairāgyeṇa—by detachment; ca—also; gṛhyate—can be so controlled.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kuntī, it is undoubtedly very
difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by constant practice and
by detachment.

**PURPORT**

The difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by Arjuna, is
accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same time He suggests that by
practice and detachment it is possible. What is that practice? In the present
age no one can observe strict rules and regulations, such as placing oneself in
a sacred place, focusing the mind on the Supersoul, restraining the senses and
mind, observing celibacy, remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, however, one engages in nine types of devotional service to the
Lord. The first and foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about
Kṛṣṇa. This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind of all
misgivings. The more one hears about Kṛṣṇa, the more one becomes enlightened and
detached from everything that draws the mind away from Kṛṣṇa. By detaching the
mind from activities not devoted to the Lord, one can very easily learn
vairāgya. Vairāgya means detachment from matter and engagement of the mind in
spirit. Impersonal spiritual detachment is more difficult than attaching the
mind to the activities of Kṛṣṇa. This is practical because by hearing about
Kṛṣṇa one becomes automatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment
is called pareśānubhūti spiritual satisfaction. It is just like the feeling of
satisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of food he eats. Similarly, by
discharge of devotional service, one feels transcendental satisfaction as the
mind becomes detached from material objectives. It is something like curing a
disease by expert treatment and appropriate diet. Hearing of the transcendental
activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa is therefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and
eating the foodstuff offered to Kṛṣṇa is the appropriate diet for the suffering
patient. This treatment is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 6.36


asaṁyatātmanā yogo

duṣprāpa iti me matiḥ

vaśyātmanā tu yatatā

śakyo ’vāptum upāyataḥ

asaṁyata—unbridled; ātmanā—by the mind; yogaḥ—self-realization;
duṣprāpaḥ—difficult to obtain; iti—thus; me—My; matiḥ—opinion; vaśya—controlled;
ātmanā—by the mind; tu—but; yatatā—while endeavoring; śakyaḥ—practical;
avāptum—to achieve; upāyataḥ—appropriate means.

**TRANSLATION**

For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he
whose mind is controlled and who strives by right means is assured of success.
That is My opinion.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not accept the
proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagement can hardly achieve
success in self-realization. Trying to practice yoga while engaging the mind in
material enjoyment is like trying to ignite a fire while pouring water on it.
Similarly, yoga practice without mental control is a waste of time. Such a show
of yoga practice may be materially lucrative, but it is useless as far as
spiritual realization is concerned. Therefore, the mind must be controlled by
engaging it constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless
one is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind. A
Kṛṣṇa conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practice without
separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achieve success without
becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious.

### 6.37


arjuna uvāca

ayatiḥ śraddhayopeto

yogāc calita-mānasaḥ

aprāpya yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ

kāṁ gatiṁ kṛṣṇa gacchati

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; ayatiḥ—unsuccessful transcendentalist; śraddhayā—with
faith; upetaḥ—engaged; yogāt—from the mystic link; calita—deviated; mānasaḥ—of
one who has such a mind; aprāpya—failing; yoga-saṁsiddhim—highest perfection in
mysticism; kām—which; gatim—destination; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; gacchati—achieves.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does not persevere,
who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization but who later
desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus does not attain perfection in
mysticism?

**PURPORT**

The path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. The
basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the living entity is not
this material body but that he is different from it and that his happiness is in
eternal life, bliss and knowledge. These are transcendental, beyond both body
and mind. Self-realization is sought by the path of knowledge, the practice of
the eightfold system or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to
realize the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship with
God, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link and achieve the
highest perfectional stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Following any of the
above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to reach the supreme goal sooner or
later. This was asserted by the Lord in the Second Chapter: even a little
endeavor on the transcendental path offers a great hope for deliverance. Out of
these three methods, the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this age
because it is the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly assured,
Arjuna is asking Lord Kṛṣṇa to confirm His former statement. One may sincerely
accept the path of self-realization, but the process of cultivation of knowledge
and the practice of the eightfold yoga system are generally very difficult for
this age. Therefore, despite constant endeavor, one may fail for many reasons.
First of all, one may not be following the process. To pursue the transcendental
path is more or less to declare war on illusory energy. Consequently, whenever a
person tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she tries to defeat
the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soul is already allured
by the modes of material energy, and there is every chance of being allured
again, even while performing transcendental disciplines. This is called yogāt
calita-mānasaḥ: deviation from the transcendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to
know the results of deviation from the path of self-realization.

### 6.38


kaccin nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś

chinnābhram iva naśyati

apratiṣṭho mahā-bāho

vimūḍho brahmaṇaḥ pathi

kaccit—whether; na—not; ubhaya—both; vibhraṣṭaḥ—deviated from; chinna—fallen;
abhram—cloud; iva—likened; naśyati—perishes; apratiṣṭhaḥ—without any position;
mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa; vimūḍhaḥ—bewildered; brahmaṇaḥ—of Transcendence;
pathi—on the path.

**TRANSLATION**

O mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa, does not such a man, being deviated from the path of
Transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any sphere?

**PURPORT**

There are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no interest in
Transcendence; therefore they are more interested in material advancement by
economic development, or in promotion to the higher planets by appropriate work.
When one takes to the path of Transcendence, one has to cease all material
activities and sacrifice all forms of so-called material happiness. If the
aspiring transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in other
words, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual success. He has no
position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the sky sometimes deviates from a
small cloud and joins a big one. But if it cannot join a big one, then it is
blown away by the wind and becomes a nonentity in the vast sky. The brahmaṇaḥ
pathi is the path of transcendental realization through knowing oneself to be
spiritual in essence, part and parcel of the Supreme Lord who is manifested as
Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the fullest manifestation of
the Supreme Absolute Truth, and therefore one who is surrendered to the Supreme
Person is a successful transcendentalist. To reach this goal of life through
Brahman and Paramātmā realization takes many, many births: Bahūnāṁ janmanām
ante. Therefore the supermost of transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga or
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the direct method.
