### 6.39


etan me saṁśayaṁ kṛṣṇa

chettum arhasy aśeṣataḥ

tvad-anyaḥ saṁśayasyāsya

chettā na hy upapadyate

etat—this is; me—my; saṁśayam—doubt; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; chettum—to dispel;
arhasi—requested to do; aśeṣataḥ—completely; tvat—Yourself; anyaḥ—without;
saṁśayāsya—of the doubt; asya—of this; chettā—remover; na—never; hi—certainly;
upapadyate—to be found.

TRANSLATION

This is my doubt O Kṛṣṇa, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But for
Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.

PURPORT

Kṛṣṇa is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the beginning of the
Bhagavad-gītā, the Lord said that all living entities exist individually in the
past, that they exist now in the present, and that they continue to retain
individual identity in the future, even after liberation from the material
entanglement. So He has already cleared up the question of the future of the
individual living entity. Now, Arjuna wants to know of the future of the
unsuccessful transcendentalist. No one is equal to or above Kṛṣṇa, and certainly
the so-called great sages and philosophers who are at the mercy of material
nature cannot equal Him. Therefore the verdict of Kṛṣṇa is the final and
complete answer to all doubts because He knows past, present and future
perfectly—but no one knows Him. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees alone can
know what is what.

### 6.40


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

pārtha naiveha nāmutra

vināśas tasya vidyate

na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid

durgatiṁ tāta gacchati

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pārtha—O son of
Prthā; na eva—never is it so; iha—in this material world; na—never; amutra—in
the next life; vināśaḥ—destruction; tasya—his; vidyate—exists; na—never;
hi—certainly; kalyāṇa-kṛt—one who is engaged in auspicious activities;
kaścit—anyone; durgatim—degradation; tāta—thereafter; gacchati—going.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Son of Pṛthā, a transcendentalist engaged in auspicious
activities does not meet with destruction either in this world or in the
spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is never overcome by evil.

PURPORT

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.17) Śrī Nārada Muni instructs Vyāsadeva as
follows:

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajann apakko ’tha patet tato yadi yatra
kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ ko vārtha āpto ’bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

“If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradation in any way. On
the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in his occupational duties and yet
not gain anything.” For material prospects, there are many activities both
scriptural and customary. A transcendentalist is supposed to give up all
material activities for the sake of spiritual advancement in life, Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. One may argue that by Kṛṣṇa consciousness one may attain the
highest perfection if it is completed, but if one does not attain such a
perfectional stage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is
enjoined in the scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction of not executing
prescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendental
activities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. The Bhāgavatam assures
the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there need be no worries. Even though he
may be subjected to the reaction of not perfectly executing prescribed duties,
he is still not a loser, because auspicious Kṛṣṇa consciousness is never
forgotten, and one so engaged will continue to be so even if he is lowborn in
the next life. On the other hand, one who simply follows strictly the prescribed
duties need not necessarily attain auspicious results if he is lacking in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

The purport may be understood as follows: humanity may be divided into two
sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who are engaged
simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge of their next life or
spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulated section. And those who follow the
principles of prescribed duties in the scriptures are classified amongst the
regulated section. The nonregulated section, both civilized and noncivilized,
educated and noneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal propensities.
Their activities are never auspicious because, enjoying the animal propensities
of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, they perpetually remain in material
existence, which is always miserable. On the other hand, those who are regulated
by scriptural injunctions and thus gradually rise to Kṛṣṇa consciousness
certainly progress in life.

Those who are then following the path of auspiciousness can be divided into
three sections, namely, 1) the followers of scriptural rules and regulations who
are enjoying material prosperity, 2) those who are trying to find out the
ultimate liberation from material existence, and 3) those who are devotees in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who are following the rules and regulations of the
scriptures for material happiness may be further divided into two classes: those
who are fruitive workers and those who desire no fruit for sense gratification.
Those who are after fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to
a higher standard of life—even to the higher planets; but still, because they
are not free from material existence, they are not following the truly
auspicious path. The only auspicious activities are those which lead one to
liberation. Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-realization or
liberation from the material bodily concept of life is not at all auspicious.
Activity in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the only auspicious activity, and anyone who
voluntarily accepts all bodily discomforts for the sake of making progress on
the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under
severe austerity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward the
ultimate realization of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, such practice is also auspicious,
and no one who is trying his best in this matter need fear degradation.

### 6.41


prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān

uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ

śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe

yoga-bhraṣṭo ’bhijāyate

prāpya—after achieving; puṇya-kṛtām—of those who performed pious activities;
lokān—planets; uṣitvā—after dwelling; śāśvatīḥ—many; samāḥ—years; śucīnām—of the
pious; śrīmatām—of the prosperous; gehe—in the house of; yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ—one who
is fallen from the path of self-realization; abhijāyate—takes his birth.

TRANSLATION

The unsuccessful yogī, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of the
pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a
family of rich aristocracy.

PURPORT

The unsuccessful yogīs are divided into two classes: one is fallen after very
little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of yoga. The yogī who
falls after a short period of practice goes to the higher planets where pious
living entities are allowed to enter. After prolonged life there, he is sent
back again to this planet, to take birth in the family of a righteous brāhmaṇa
vaiṣṇava or of aristocratic merchants.

The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfection of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. But those who do not persevere to such an extent and fail due to
material allurements are allowed, by the grace of the Lord, to make full
utilization of their material propensities. And after that, they are given
opportunities to live prosperous lives in righteous or aristocratic families.
Those who are born in such families may take advantage of the facilities and try
to elevate themselves to full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 6.42


atha vā yoginām eva

kule bhavati dhīmatām

etad dhi durlabhataraṁ

loke janma yad īdṛśam

athavā—or; yoginām—of learned transcendentalists; eva—certainly; kule—in the
family of; bhavati—takes birth; dhīmatām—of those who are endowed with great
wisdom; etat—this; hi—certainly; durlabhataram—very rare; loke—in this world;
janma—birth; yat—that which; īdṛśam—like this.

TRANSLATION

Or he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely great in
wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.

PURPORT

Birth in a family of yogīs or transcendentalists—those with great wisdom—is
praised herein because the child born in such a family receives spiritual
impetus from the very beginning of his life. It is especially the case in the
ācārya or gosvāmī families. Such families are very learned and devoted by
tradition and training, and thus they become spiritual masters. In India there
are many such ācārya families, but they have now degenerated due to insufficient
education and training. By the grace of the Lord, there are still families that
foster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is certainly very
fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both our spiritual
master, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and
our humble self, had the opportunity to take birth in such families, by the
grace of the Lord, and both of us were trained in the devotional service of the
Lord from the very beginning of our lives. Later on we met by the order of the
transcendental system.

### 6.43


tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ

labhate paurva-dehikam

yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ

saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana

tatra—thereupon; tam—that; buddhi-saṁyogam—revival of such consciousness;
labhate—regains; paurva—previous; dehikam—bodily consciousness;
yatate—endeavors; ca—also; tataḥ—thereafter; bhūyaḥ—again; saṁsiddhau—for
perfection; kuru-nandana—O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

On taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of his
previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order to achieve
complete success, O son of Kuru.

PURPORT

King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good brāhmaṇa, is an
example of good birth for the revival of previous transcendental consciousness.
King Bharata was the Emperor of the world, and since his time this planet is
known among the demigods as Bhāratavarṣa. Formerly it was known as
Ilāvartavarṣa. The Emperor, at an early age, retired for spiritual perfection
but failed to achieve success. In his next life he took birth in the family of a
good brāhmaṇa and was known as Jaḍabharata because he always remained secluded
and did not talk to anyone. And later on, he was discovered as the greatest
transcendentalist by King Rahūgaṇa. From his life it is understood that
transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga, never go in vain. By the
grace of the Lord the transcendentalist gets repeated opportunities for complete
perfection in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 6.44


pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva

hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ

jijñāsur api yogasya

śabda-brahmātivartate

pūrva—previous; abhyāsena—practice; tena—by the influence of that;
eva—certainly; hriyate—is attracted; hi—surely; avaśaḥ—helpless; api—also;
saḥ—he; jijñāsuḥ—willing to know; api—so; yogasya—of yoga;
śabda-brahma—ritualistic principles of scripture; ativartate—transcends.

TRANSLATION

By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically
becomes attracted to the yogic principles—even without seeking them. Such an
inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga, stands always above the
ritualistic principles of the scriptures.

PURPORT

Advanced yogīs are not very much attracted to the rituals of the scriptures, but
they automatically become attracted to the yoga principles, which can elevate
them to complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the highest yoga perfection. In the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.8), such disregard of Vedic rituals by the advanced
transcendentalists is explained as follows:

aho bata śvapaco ’to garīyān yajjihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam tepus tapas te
juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te.

“O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far, far
advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters. Such
chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities and sacrifices,
bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scriptural studies.”

The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who accepted Ṭhākur
Haridāsa as one of His most important disciples. Although Ṭhākur Haridāsa
happened to take his birth in a Moslem family, he was elevated to the post of
nāmācārya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly attended principle of chanting
three hundred thousand holy names of the Lord daily: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. And because
he chanted the holy name of the Lord constantly, it is understood that in his
previous life he must have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the
Vedas, known as śabda-brahman. Unless, therefore, one is purified, one cannot
take to the principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness nor become engaged in chanting the
holy name of the Lord, Hare Kṛṣṇa.
