### 7.3


manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

manuṣyāṇām—of men; sahasreṣu—out of many thousands; kaścit—someone;
yatati—endeavors; siddhaye—for perfection; yatatām—of those so endeavoring;
api—indeed; siddhānām—of those who have achieved perfection; kaścit—someone;
mām—Me; vetti—does know; tattvataḥ—in fact.

**TRANSLATION**

Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those
who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

**PURPORT**

There are various grades of men, and out of many thousands one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to know what is the
self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth. Generally mankind is
simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely eating, sleeping, defending
and mating, and hardly anyone is interested in transcendental knowledge. The
first six chapters of the Gītā are meant for those who are interested in
transcendental knowledge, in understanding the self, the Superself and the
process of realization by jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, and discrimination of the
self from matter. However, Kṛṣṇa can only be known by persons who are in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahman
realization, for this is easier than understanding Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge of Brahman and
Paramātmā. The yogīs and jñānīs are confused in their attempts to understand
Kṛṣṇa, although the greatest of the impersonalists, Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya, has
admitted in his Gītā commentary that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. But his followers do not accept Kṛṣṇa as such, for it is very difficult
to know Kṛṣṇa, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonal
Brahman.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, the
primeval Lord Govinda. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ anādir
ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam. It is very difficult for the nondevotees to
know Him. Although nondevotees declare that the path of bhakti or devotional
service is very easy, they cannot practice it. If the path of bhakti is so easy,
as the nondevotee class of men proclaim, then why do they take up the difficult
path? Actually the path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called path of bhakti
practiced by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy, but
when it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations, the
speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī writes in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu:

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva
kalpate.

“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures
like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, Nārada-pañcarātra, etc., is simply an unnecessary
disturbance in society.”

It is not possible for the Brahman realized impersonalist or the Paramātmā
realized yogī to understand Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the son
of mother Yaśodā or the charioteer of Arjuna. Even the great demigods are
sometimes confused about Kṛṣṇa: “muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ,” “māṁ tu veda na
kaścana.” “No one knows Me as I am,” the Lord says. And if one does know Him,
then “sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ.” “Such a great soul is very rare.” Therefore
unless one practices devotional service to the Lord, he cannot know Kṛṣṇa as He
is (tattvataḥ), even though one is a great scholar or philosopher. Only the pure
devotees can know something of the inconceivable transcendental qualities in
Kṛṣṇa, in the cause of all causes, in His omnipotence and opulence, and in His
wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, because Kṛṣṇa is
benevolently inclined to His devotees. He is the last word in Brahman
realization, and the devotees alone can realize Him as He is. Therefore it is
said:

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyāiḥ sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam
eva sphuraty adaḥ

“No one can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He
reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him.” (Padma Purāṇa)

### 7.4


bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

bhūmiḥ—earth; āpaḥ—water; analaḥ—fire; vāyuḥ—air; kham—ether; manaḥ—mind;
buddhiḥ—intelligence; eva—certainly; ca—and; ahaṅkāraḥ—false ego; iti—thus;
iyam—all these; me—My; bhinnā—separated; prakṛtiḥ—energies; aṣṭadhā—total eight.

**TRANSLATION**

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—altogether
these eight comprise My separated material energies.

**PURPORT**

The science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His diverse
energies. Material nature is called prakṛti, or the energy of the Lord in His
different puruṣa incarnations (expansions) as described in the Svatvata Tantra:

viṣṇos tu trīṇi rūpāṇi puruṣākhyāny atho viduḥ ekantu mahataḥ sraṣṭṛ dvitīyaṁ tv
aṇḍa-saṁsthitam tṛtīyaṁ sarvabhūta-sthaṁ tāni jñātvā vimucyate

“For material creation, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s plenary expansion assumes three Viṣṇus. The
first one, Mahā-Viṣṇu, creates the total material energy, known as mahat-tattva.
The second, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, enters into all the universes to create
diversities in each of them. The third, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, is diffused as the
all-pervading Supersoul in all the universes and is known as Paramātmā, who is
present even within the atoms. Anyone who knows these three Viṣṇus can be
liberated from material entanglement.”

This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energies of the
Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed by these three Viṣṇu
expansions of Lord Kṛṣṇa. These Puruṣas are called incarnations. Generally one
who does not know the science of God (Kṛṣṇa) assumes that this material world is
for the enjoyment of the living entities and that the living entities are the
causes (Puruṣas), controllers and enjoyers of the material energy. According to
Bhagavad-gītā this atheistic conclusion is false. In the verse under discussion
it is stated that Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of the material manifestation.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also confirms this. The ingredients of the material
manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even the brahmajyoti, which is
the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is a spiritual energy manifested in the
spiritual sky. There are no spiritual diversities in brahmajyoti as there are in
the Vaikuṇṭhalokas, and the impersonalist accepts this brahmajyoti as the
ultimate eternal goal. The Paramātmā manifestation is also a temporary
all-pervasive aspect of the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The Paramātmā manifestation is
not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore the factual Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa. He is the complete energetic person, and
He possesses different separated and internal energies.

In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, as above
mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namely earth, water,
fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creations or the gross
creations, within which the five sense objects are included. They are the
manifestations of physical sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Material science
comprises these ten items and nothing more. But the other three items, namely
mind, intelligence and false ego, are neglected by the materialists.
Philosophers who deal with mental activities are also not perfect in knowledge
because they do not know the ultimate source, Kṛṣṇa. The false ego—“I am,” and
“It is mine,” which constitute the basic principle of material
existence—includes ten sense organs for material activities. Intelligence refers
to the total material creation, called the mahat-tattva. Therefore from the
eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-four elements of
the material world, which are the subject matter of sāṅkhya atheistic
philosophy; they are originally offshoots from Kṛṣṇa’s energies and are
separated from Him, but atheistic sāṅkhya philosophers with a poor fund of
knowledge do not know Kṛṣṇa as the cause of all causes. The subject matter for
discussion in the sāṅkhya philosophy is only the manifestation of the external
energy of Kṛṣṇa, as it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā.

### 7.5


apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

aparā—inferior; iyam—this; itaḥ—besides this; tu—but; anyām—another;
prakṛtim—energy; viddhi—just try to understand; me—My; parām—superior;
jīva-bhūtām—the living entities; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; yayā—by whom;
idam—this; dhāryate—being utilized or exploited; jagat—the material world.

**TRANSLATION**

Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy
of Mine, which are all living entities who are struggling with material nature
and are sustaining the universe.

**PURPORT**

Here it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the superior nature
(or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy is matter manifested in
different elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence
and false ego. Both forms of material nature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and
subtle (mind, etc.), are products of the inferior energy. The living entities,
who are exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are the
superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy that the
entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has no power to act
unless it is moved by the superior energy, the living entity. Energies are
always controlled by the energetic, and therefore living entities are always
controlled by the Lord—they have no independant existence. They are never
equally powerful, as unintelligent men think. The distinction between the living
entities and the Lord is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as follows (10.87.30):

aparimitā dhruvās tanubhṛto yadi sarva-gatās tarhiṁ na śāsyateti niyamo dhruva
netarathā ajani ca yanmayaṁ tad avimucya niyantṛ bhavet samam anujānatāṁ
yad-amataṁ mata-duṣṭatayā

“O Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. But if the
living entities are accepted as minute energies of Your Lordship, then they are
at once subject to Your supreme control. Therefore real liberation entails
surrender by the living entities to Your control, and that surrender will make
them happy. In that constitutional position only can they be controllers.
Therefore, men with limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that God
and the living entities are equal in all respects are actually misleading
themselves and others.”

The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is the only controller, and all living entities are
controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energy because the
quality of their existence is one and the same with the Supreme, but they are
never equal to the Lord in quantity of power. While exploiting the gross and
subtle inferior energy (matter), the superior energy (the living entity) forgets
his real spiritual mind and intelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the
influence of matter upon the living entity. But when the living entity becomes
free from the influence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage
called mukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the influence of material
illusion, thinks, “I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine.” His actual
position is realized when he is liberated from all material ideas, including the
conception of his becoming one in all respects with God. Therefore one may
conclude that the Gītā confirms the living entity to be only one of the
multi-energies of Kṛṣṇa; and when this energy is freed from material
contamination, it becomes fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, or liberated.

### 7.6


etad-yonīni bhūtāni

sarvāṇīty upadhāraya

ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ

prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

etat—these two natures; yonīni—source of birth; bhūtāni—everything created;
sarvāṇi—all; iti—thus; upadhāraya—know; aham—I; kṛtsnasya—all-inclusive;
jagataḥ—of the world; prabhavaḥ—source of manifestation; pralayaḥ—annihilation;
tathā—as well as.

**TRANSLATION**

Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know for
certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.

**PURPORT**

Everything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the basic
field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is not created at a
certain stage of material development. Rather, this material world is manifested
only on the basis of spiritual energy. This material body is developed because
spirit is present within matter; a child grows gradually to boyhood and then to
manhood because of that superior energy, spirit soul, being present. Similarly,
the entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developed because of
the presence of the Supersoul, Viṣṇu. Therefore spirit and matter, which combine
together to manifest this gigantic universal form, are originally two energies
of the Lord, and consequently the Lord is the original cause of everything. A
fragmental part and parcel of the Lord, namely, the living entity, may by
manipulation of material energy construct a skyscraper, factory or city, but he
cannot create matter out of nothing, and he certainly cannot construct a planet
or a universe. The cause of the universe is the Supersoul, Kṛṣṇa, the supreme
creator of all individual souls and the original cause of all causes, as the
Kaṭha Upaniṣad confirms: nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām.
