### 7.7


mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat

kiñcid asti dhanañjaya

mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ

sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

mattaḥ—beyond Myself; parataram—superior; na—not; anyat—anything else;
kiñcit—something; asti—there is; dhanañjaya—O conquerer of wealth; mayi—in Me;
sarvam—all that be; idam—which we see; protam—strung; sūtre—on a thread;
maṇi-gaṇāḥ—pearls; iva—likened.

**TRANSLATION**

O conquerer of wealth [Arjuna], there is no Truth superior to Me. Everything
rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.

**PURPORT**

There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth is
personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gītā is concerned, the Absolute Truth
is the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and this is confirmed in every step. In
this verse, in particular, it is stressed that the Absolute Truth is a person.
That the Personality of Godhead is the Supreme Absolute Truth is also the
affirmation of the Brahma-saṁhitā: īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ
sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ; that is, the Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of
Godhead is Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is the primeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure,
Govinda, and the eternal form of complete bliss and knowledge. These authorities
leave no doubt that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the cause of all
causes. The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the Vedic version
given in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad: tato yad uttarataraṁ tad arūpam anāmayaṁ ya
etad vidur amṛtās te bhavanti athetare duḥkham evāpi yanti. “In the material
world Brahmā, the primeval living entity within the universe, is understood to
be the supreme amongst the demigods, human beings and lower animals. But beyond
Brahmā there is the Transcendence who has no material form and is free from all
material contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also becomes transcendental,
but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries of the material world.”

The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arūpam. But this arūpam is not
impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity, bliss and
knowledge as described in the Brahma-saṁhitā quoted above. Other verses in the
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad substantiate this as follows:

vedāham etaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt tam eva vidvān
amṛta iha bhavati nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ayanāya yasmāt paraṁ nāparam asti kiñcid
yasmānnāṇīyo na jyāyo ’sti kiñcit

"I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to all
material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him can transcend the bonds
of birth and death. There is no way for liberation other than this knowledge of
that Supreme Person.

“There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person because He is the supermost.
He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the greatest. He is
situated as a silent tree, and He illumines the transcendental sky, and as a
tree spreads its roots, He spreads His extensive energies.”

From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead who is all-pervading by His multi-energies, both material
and spiritual.

### 7.8


raso ’ham apsu kaunteya

prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ

praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu

śabdaḥ khe pauruṣaṁ nṛṣu

rasaḥ—taste; aham—I; apsu—in water; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; prabhā asmi—I am
the light; śaśi-sūryayoḥ—in the sun and the moon; praṇavaḥ—the three letters
A.U.M.; sarva—in all; vedeṣu—in the Vedas; śabdaḥ—sound vibration; khe—in the
ether; pauruṣam—ability; nṛṣu—in man.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Kuntī [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the
moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in ether and ability
in man.

**PURPORT**

This verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse material and
spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarily perceived by His
different energies, and in this way He is realized impersonally. As the demigod
in the sun is a person and is perceived by his all-pervading energy, the
sunshine, similarly, the Lord, although in His eternal abode, is perceived by
His all-pervading, diffusive energies. The taste of water is the active
principle of water. No one likes to drink sea water because the pure taste of
water is mixed with salt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the
taste, and this pure taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalist
perceives the presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and the personalist
also glorifies the Lord for His kindly supplying water to quench man’s thirst.
That is the way of perceiving the Supreme. Practically speaking, there is no
conflict between personalism and impersonalism. One who knows God knows that the
impersonal conception and personal conception are simultaneously present in
everything and that there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya
established His sublime doctrine: acintya-bheda and
abheda-tattvam—simultaneously one and different.

The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from the
brahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Similarly praṇava
or the omkāra transcendental sound used in the beginning of every Vedic hymn to
address the Supreme Lord also emanates from Him. Because the impersonalists are
very much afraid of addressing the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa by His innumerable names,
they prefer to vibrate the transcendental sound omkāra. But they do not realize
that omkāra is the sound representation of Kṛṣṇa. The jurisdiction of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness extends everywhere, and one who knows Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
blessed. Those who do not know Kṛṣṇa are in illusion, and so knowledge of Kṛṣṇa
is liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.

### 7.9


puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca

tejaś cāsmi vibhāvasau

jīvanaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

tapaś cāsmi tapasviṣu

puṇyaḥ—original; gandhaḥ—fragrance; pṛthivyām—in the earth; ca—also;
tejaḥ—temperature; ca—also; asmi—I am; vibhāvasau—in the fire; jīvanam—life;
sarva—all; bhūteṣu—living entities; tapaḥ—penance; ca—also; asmi—I am;
tapasviṣu—in those who practice penance.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the
life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.

**PURPORT**

Puṇya means that which is not decomposed; puṇya is original. Everything in the
material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavor and fragrance in
a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air, etc. The uncontaminated
flavor, the original flavor, which permeates everything, is Kṛṣṇa. Similarly,
everything has a particular original taste, and this taste can be changed by the
mixture of chemicals. So everything original has some smell, some fragrance, and
some taste. Vibhāva means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we cannot
cook, etc., and that fire is Kṛṣṇa. The heat in the fire is Kṛṣṇa. According to
Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature in the belly. So even
for digestion fire is needed. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness we become aware that earth,
water, fire, air and every active principle, all chemicals and all material
elements are due to Kṛṣṇa. The duration of man’s life is also due to Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, man can prolong his life or diminish it. So
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is active in every sphere.

### 7.10


bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

viddhi pārtha sanātanam

buddhir buddhimatām asmi

tejas tejasvinām aham

bījam—seed; mām—unto Me; sarva-bhūtānām—of all living entities; viddhi—try to
understand; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sanātanam—original, eternal;
buddhiḥ—intelligence; buddhimatām—of the intelligent; asmi—I am; tejaḥ—prowess;
tejasvinām—of the powerful; aham—I am.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.

**PURPORT**

Bījam means seed; Kṛṣṇa is the seed of everything. In contact with material
nature, the seed fructifies into various living entities, movable and inert.
Birds, beasts, men and many other living creatures are moving living entities;
trees and plants, however, are inert—they cannot move, but only stand. Every
entity is contained within the scope of 8,400,000 species of life; some of them
are moving and some of them are inert. In all cases, however, the seed of their
life is Kṛṣṇa. As stated in Vedic literature, Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute
Truth, is that from which everything is emanating. Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman, the
Supreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal and Parabrahman is personal. Impersonal
Brahman is situated in the personal aspect—that is stated in Bhagavad-gītā.
Therefore, originally, Kṛṣṇa is the source of everything. He is the root. As the
root of a tree maintains the whole tree, Kṛṣṇa, being the original root of all
things, maintains everything in this material manifestation. This is also
confirmed in the Vedic literature. Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. “The Supreme
Absolute Truth is that from which everything is born.” He is the prime eternal
among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity of all living entities, and
He alone is maintaining all life. Kṛṣṇa also says that He is the root of all
intelligence. Unless a person is intelligent he cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.


### 7.11


balaṁ balavatāṁ cāhaṁ

kāma-rāga-vivarjitam

dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu

kāmo ’smi bharatarṣabha

balam—strength; balavatām—of the strong; ca—and; aham—I am; kāma—passion;
rāga—attachment; vivarjitam—devoid of; dharma-aviruddha—not against the
religious principles; bhūteṣu—in all beings; kāmaḥ—sex-life; asmi—I am;
bharatarṣabha—O lord of the Bhāratas.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life
which is not contrary to religious principles, O Lord of the Bhāratas [Arjuna].

**PURPORT**

The strong man’s strength should be applied to protect the weak, not for
personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious principles
(dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not otherwise. The
responsibility of parents is then to make their offspring Kṛṣṇa conscious.

### 7.12


ye caiva sāttvikā bhāvā

rājasās tāmasāś ca ye

matta eveti tān viddhi

na tv ahaṁ teṣu te mayi

ye—all those; ca—and; eva—certainly; sāttvikāḥ—in goodness; bhāvāḥ—states of
being; rājasāḥ—mode of passion; tāmasāḥ—mode of ignorance; ca—also; ye—although;
mattaḥ—from Me; eva—certainly; iti—thus; tān—those; viddhi—try to know; na—not;
tu—but; aham—I; teṣu—in those; te—they; mayi—unto Me.

**TRANSLATION**

All states of being—be they of goodness, passion or ignorance—are manifested by
My energy. I am, in one sense, everything—but I am independant. I am not under
the modes of this material nature.

**PURPORT**

All material activities in the world are being conducted under the three modes
of material nature. Although these material modes of nature are emanations from
the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, He is not subject to them. For instance, under the
state laws one may be punished, but the king, the lawmaker, is not subject to
that law. Similarly, all the modes of material nature—goodness, passion and
ignorance—are emanations from the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is not subject
to material nature. Therefore He is nirguṇa, which means that these guṇas, or
modes, although issuing from Him, do not affect Him. That is one of the special
characteristics of Bhagavān, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 7.13


tribhir guṇa-mayair bhāvair

ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

mohitaṁ nābhijānāti

mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

tribhiḥ—three; guṇamayaiḥ—by the three guṇas; bhāvaiḥ—state of being; ebhiḥ—all
this; sarvam—the whole world; idam—in this world; jagat—universe;
mohitam—deluded; na abhijānāti—do not know; mām—unto Me; ebhyaḥ—above these;
param—the Supreme; avyayam—inexhaustible.

**TRANSLATION**

Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole world
does not know Me who am above the modes and inexhaustible.

**PURPORT**

The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those who are
bewildered by these three modes cannot understand that transcendental to this
material nature is the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa. In this material world everyone is
under the influence of these three guṇas and is thus bewildered.

Bv nature living entities have particular types of body and particular types of
psychic and biological activities accordingly. There are four classes of men
functioning in the three material modes of nature. Those who are purely in the
mode of goodness are called brāhmaṇas. Those who are purely in the mode of
passion are called kṣatriyas. Those who are in the modes of both passion and
ignorance are called vaiśyas. Those who are completely in ignorance are called
śūdras. And those who are less than that are animals or animal life. However,
these designations are not permanent. I may either be a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya,
vaiśya or whatever—in any case, this life is temporary. But although life is
temporary and we do not know what we are going to be in the next life, still, by
the spell of this illusory energy, we consider ourselves in the light of this
bodily conception of life, and we thus think that we are American, Indian,
Russian or brāhmaṇa, Hindu, Muslim, etc. And if we become entangled with the
modes of material nature, then we forget the Supreme Personality of Godhead who
is behind all these modes. So Lord Kṛṣṇa says that men, deluded by these three
modes of nature, do not understand that behind the material background is the
Supreme Godhead.

There are many different kinds of living entities—human beings, demigods,
animals, etc.—and each and every one of them is under the influence of material
nature, and all of them have forgotten the transcendent Personality of Godhead.
Those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance, and even those who are in
the mode of goodness, cannot go beyond the impersonal Brahman conception of the
Absolute Truth. They are bewildered before the Supreme Lord in His personal
feature, which possesses all beauty, opulence, knowledge, strength, fame and
renunciation. When even those who are in goodness cannot understand, what hope
is there for those in passion and ignorance? Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
transcendental to all these three modes of material nature, and those who are
truly established in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are actually liberated.