### 7.14


daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

daivī—transcendental; hi—certainly; eṣā—this; guṇamayī—consisting of the three
modes of material nature; mama—My; māyā—energy; duratyayā—very difficult to
overcome; mām—unto Me; eva—certainly; ye—those; prapadyante—surrender; māyām
etām—this illusory energy; taranti—overcome; te—they.

TRANSLATION

This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is
difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross
beyond it.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all these
energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of His energies and
are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy, their original
superior power is covered. Being thus covered by material energy, one cannot
possibly overcome its influence. As previously stated, both the material and
spiritual natures, being emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are
eternal. The living entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the Lord,
but due to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion is also
eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, or eternally
conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becoming conditioned at a
certain date in material history. Consequently, his release from the clutches of
material nature is very difficult, even though that material nature is an
inferior energy, because material energy is ultimately conducted by the supreme
will, which the living entity cannot overcome. Inferior material nature is
defined herein as divine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the
divine will. Being conducted by divine will, material nature, although inferior,
acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction of the cosmic
manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows:

māyāṁ tu prakṛtiṁ vidyān māyinaṁ tu maheśvaram.

“Although māyā [illusion] is false or temporary, the background of māyā is the
supreme magician, the Personality of Godhead, who is Maheśvara, the supreme
controller.”

Another meaning of guṇa is rope; it is to be understood that the conditioned
soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man bound by the hands and feet
cannot free himself—he must be helped by a person who is unbound. Because the
bound cannot help the bound, the rescuer must be liberated. Therefore, only Lord
Kṛṣṇa, or His bona fide representative the spiritual master, can release the
conditioned soul. Without such superior help, one cannot be freed from the
bondage of material nature. Devotional service, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, can help
one gain such release. Kṛṣṇa, being the Lord of illusory energy, can order this
insurmountable energy to release the conditioned soul. He orders this release
out of His causeless mercy on the surrendered soul and out of His paternal
affection for the living entity who is originally a beloved son of the Lord.
Therefore surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord is the only means to get
free from the clutches of the stringent material nature.

The words mām eva are also significant. Mām means unto Kṛṣṇa (Viṣṇu) only, and
not Brahmā or Śiva. Although Brahmā and Śiva are greatly elevated and are almost
on the level of Viṣṇu, it is not possible for such incarnations of rājo-guṇa
(passion) and tamo-guṇa (ignorance) to release the conditioned soul from the
clutches of māyā. In other words, both Brahmā and Śiva are also under the
influence of māyā. Only Viṣṇu is the master of māyā; therefore He can alone give
release to the conditioned soul. The Vedas confirm this in the phrase tvam eva
viditvā or “Freedom is possible only by understanding Kṛṣṇa.” Even Lord Śiva
affirms that liberation can be achieved only by the mercy of Viṣṇu. Lord Śiva
says:

mukti-pradātā sarveṣāṁ viṣṇur eva na saṁśayaḥ.

"There is no doubt that Viṣṇu is the deliverer of liberation for everyone.

### 7.15


na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

na—not; mām—unto Me; duṣkṛtinaḥ—miscreants; mūḍhāḥ—foolish;
prapadyante—surrender; narādhamāḥ—lowest among mankind; māyayā—by the illusory
energy; apahṛta—stolen by illusion; jñānāḥ—knowledge; asuram—demonic;
bhāvam—nature; āśritāḥ—accepting.

TRANSLATION

Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge
is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not
surrender unto Me.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gītā that simply by surrendering oneself unto the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality Kṛṣṇa, one can surmount the stringent laws of
material nature. At this point a question arises: How is it that educated
philosophers, scientists, businessmen, administrators and all the leaders of
ordinary men do not surrender to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the all-powerful
Personality of Godhead? Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature,
is sought by the leaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans and
perseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberation is
possible by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, then why don’t these intelligent and hard-working leaders adopt this
simple method?

The Gītā answers this question very frankly. Those really learned leaders of
society like Brahmā, Śiva, Kapila, the Kumāras, Manu, Vyāsa, Devala, Asita,
Janaka, Prahlāda, Bali, and later on Madhvācārya, Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Caitanya
and many others—who are faithful philosophers, politicians, educators,
scientists, etc.—surrender to the lotus feet of the Supreme Person, the
all-powerful authority. Those who are not actually philosophers, scientists,
educators, administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for material
gain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have no idea of
God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans and consequently complicate
the problems of material existence in their vain attempts to solve them. Because
material energy (nature) is so powerful, it can resist the unauthorized plans of
the atheists and baffle the knowledge of “planning commissions.”

The atheistic plan-makers are described herein by the word duṣkṛtina, or
“miscreants.” Kṛtina means one who has performed meritorious work. The atheist
planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritorious also, because any
gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence to execute. But because the
atheist’s brain is improperly utilized in opposing the plan of the Supreme Lord,
the atheistic planmaker is called duṣkṛtina, which indicates that his
intelligence and efforts are misdirected.

In the Gītā it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independant authority. It works as the
shadow moves, in accordance with the movements of the object. But still material
energy is very powerful, and the atheist, due to his godless temperament, cannot
know how it works; nor can he know the plan of the Supreme Lord. Under illusion
and the modes of passion and ignorance, all his plans are baffled, as in the
case of Hiraṇyakaśipu and Rāvaṇa, whose plans were smashed to dust although they
were both materially learned as scientists, philosophers, administrators and
educators. These duṣkṛtinas, or miscreants, are of four different patterns, as
outlined below:

(1) The mūḍhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hard-working beasts of
burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor by themselves, and so do
not want to part with them for the Supreme. The typical example of the beast of
burden is the ass. This humble beast is made to work very hard by his master.
The ass does not really know for whom he works so hard day and night. He remains
satisfied by filling his stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a while
under fear of being beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite at the
risk of being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings poetry and
philosophy sometimes, but this braying only disturbs others. This is the
position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know for whom he should
work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant for yajña (sacrifice).

Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burden of
self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of the immortality of the
living being. To such mūḍhas, material gains, which are destructible, are life’s
all in all—despite the fact that the mūḍhas enjoy only a very small fraction of
the fruit of labor. Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive
gain, and although they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied with
practically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day and night for
the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their real master, the foolish
workers waste their valuable time serving mammon. Unfortunately, they never
surrender to the supreme master of all masters, nor do they take time to hear of
Him from the proper sources. The swine who eat the soil do not care to accept
sweetmeats made of sugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly
continue to hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering mundane force
that moves the material world.

(2) Another class of duṣkṛtina, or miscreant, is called the narādhama, or the
lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the lowest. Out of
the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, there are 400,000 human
species. Out of these there are numerous lower forms of human life that are
mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beings are those who have regulated
principles of social, political and religious life. Those who are socially and
politically developed, but who have no religious principles, must be considered
narādhamas. Nor is religion without God religion, because the purpose of
following religious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and man’s relation
with Him. In the Gītā the Personality of Godhead clearly states that there is no
authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. The civilized form of
human life is meant for man’s reviving the lost consciousness of his eternal
relation with the Supreme Truth, the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
all-powerful. Whoever loses this chance is classified as a narādhama. We get
information from revealed scriptures that when the baby is in the mother’s womb
(an extremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God for deliverance and
promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To pray to God when he is
in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living being because he is
eternally related with God. But after his deliverance, the child forgets the
difficulties of birth and forgets his deliverer also, being influenced by māyā,
the illusory energy.

It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divine consciousness
dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatory ceremonies, as enjoined in the
Manu-smṛti, which is the guide to religious principles, are meant for reviving
God consciousness in the system of varṇāśrama. However, no process is strictly
followed now in any part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of the
population is narādhama.

When the whole population becomes narādhama, naturally all their so-called
education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy of physical nature.
According to the standard of the Gītā, a learned man is he who sees on equal
terms the learned brāhmaṇa, the dog, the cow, the elephant and the dog-eater.
That is the vision of a true devotee. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, who is the
incarnation of Godhead as divine master, delivered the typical narādhamas, the
brothers Jagai and Madhai, and showed how the mercy of a real devotee is
bestowed upon the lowest of mankind. So the narādhama who is condemned by the
Personality of Godhead can again revive his spiritual consciousness only by the
mercy of a devotee.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in propagating the bhāgavata-dharma or activities of
the devotees, has recommended that people submissively hear the message of the
Personality of Godhead. The essence of this message is Bhagavad-gītā. The lowest
amongst human beings can be delivered by this submissive hearing process only,
but unfortunately they even deny giving an aural reception to these messages,
and what to speak of surrendering to the will of the Supreme Lord? Narādhamas,
or the lowest of mankind, will fully neglect the prime duty of the human being.

(3) The next class of duṣkṛtina is called māyayāpahṛta-jñāna, or those persons
whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence of illusory material
energy. They are mostly very learned fellows—great philosophers, poets,
literati, scientists, etc.—but the illusory energy misguides them, and therefore
they disobey the Supreme Lord.

There are a great number of māyayāpahṛta-jñānas at the present moment, even
amongst the scholars of the Gītā. In the Gītā, in plain and simple language, it
is stated that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is none
equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned as the father of Brahmā, the
original father of all human beings. In fact, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is said to be not only
the father of Brahmā but also the father of all species of life. He is the root
of the impersonal Brahman and Paramātmā; the Supersoul in every entity is His
plenary portion. He is the fountainhead of everything, and everyone is advised
to surrender unto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear statements, the
māyayāpahṛta-jñāna deride the Personality of the Supreme Lord and consider Him
merely another human being. They do not know that the blessed form of human life
is designed after the eternal and transcendental feature of the Supreme Lord.

All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gītā by the class of
māyayāpahṛta-jñāna, outside the purview of the paramparā system, are so many
stumbling blocks in the path of spiritual understanding. The deluded
interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, nor do they
teach others to follow this principle.

(4) The last class of duṣkṛtina is called āsuraṁ bhāvam āśrita, or those of
demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them argue that the
Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world, but they are unable to
give any tangible reasons as to why not. There are others who make Him
subordinate to the impersonal feature, although the opposite is declared in the
Gītā. Envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the atheist will present a
number of illicit incarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such
persons whose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godhead
cannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Yāmunācārya Albandru of South India said, “O my Lord! You are unknowable to
persons involved with atheistic principles despite Your uncommon qualities,
features, and activities and despite Your personality being confirmed by all the
revealed scriptures in the quality of goodness, and despite Your being
acknowledged by the famous authorities renowned for their depth of knowledge in
the transcendental science and situated in the godly qualities.”

Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3) the
deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as above mentioned, never
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead in spite of all
scriptural and authoritative advice.
