### 7.16


catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino ’rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

catur-vidhāḥ—four kinds of; bhajante—render services; mām—unto Me;
janāḥ—persons; sukṛtinaḥ—those who are pious; arjuna—O Arjuna; ārtaḥ—the
distressed; jijñāsuḥ—the inquisitive; artha-arthī—one who desires material gain;
jñānī—one who knows things as they are; ca—also; bharatarṣabha—O great one
amongst the descendants of Bharata.

**TRANSLATION**

O best among the Bhāratas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional
service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he
who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.

**PURPORT**

Unlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles of the
scriptures, and they are called sukṛtina, or those who obey the rules and
regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, and are, more or less,
devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there are four classes of men—those
who are sometimes distressed, those who are in need of money, those who are
sometimes inquisitive, and those who are sometimes searching after knowledge of
the Absolute Truth. These persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional
service under different conditions. These are not pure devotees because they
have some aspiration to fulfill in exchange for devotional service. Pure
devotional service is without aspiration and without desire for material profit.
The Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu defines pure devotion thus:

anyābhilāṣitāśūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir
uttamā.

“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa
favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional
service.”

When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional service
and are completely purified by the association of a pure devotee, they also
become pure devotees. As far as the miscreants are concerned, for them
devotional service is very difficult because their lives are selfish, irregular
and without spiritual goals. But even some of them, by chance, when they come in
contact with a pure devotee, also become pure devotees.

Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord in material
distress and at that time associate with pure devotees and become, in their
distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simply frustrated also come
sometimes to associate with the pure devotees and become inquisitive to know
about God. Similarly, when the dry philosophers are frustrated in every field of
knowledge, they sometimes want to learn of God, and they come to the Supreme
Lord to render devotional service and thus transcend knowledge of the impersonal
Brahman and the localized Paramātmā and come to the personal conception of
Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee. On the whole, when
the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of knowledge, and those who are in
need of money are free from all material desires, and when they fully understand
that material remuneration has nothing to do with spiritual improvement, they
become pure devotees. As long as such a purified stage is not attained, devotees
in transcendental service to the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, and
they search after mundane knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all this
before one can come to the stage of pure devotional service.

### 7.17


teṣāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta

eka-bhaktir viśiṣyate

priyo hi jñānino ’tyartham

ahaṁ sa ca mama priyaḥ

teṣām—out of them; jñānī—one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktaḥ—always engaged;
eka—only one; bhaktiḥ—devotional service; viśiṣyate—especially; priyaḥ—very
dear; hi—certainly; jñāninaḥ—person in knowledge; atyartham highly; aham—I am;
saḥ—he; ca—also; mama—Mine; priyaḥ—dear.

**TRANSLATION**

Of these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me through pure
devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him, and he is dear to Me.

**PURPORT**

Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless, and the seeker after supreme knowledge can all
become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge of the Absolute
Truth and free from all material desires becomes a really pure devotee of the
Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is in full knowledge and is at the
same time engaged in devotional service is, the Lord says, the best. By
searching after knowledge one realizes that his self is different from his
material body, and when further advanced he comes to the knowledge of impersonal
Brahman and Paramātmā. When one is fully purified, he realizes that his
constitutional position is to be the eternal servant of God. So by association
with pure devotees, the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker after material
amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselves pure. But in the
preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge of the Supreme Lord and is
at the same time executing devotional service is very dear to the Lord. He who
is situated in pure knowledge of the transcendence of the Supreme Personality of
God is so protected in devotional service that material contaminations cannot
touch him.

### 7.18


udārāḥ sarva evaite

jñānī tv ātmaiva me matam

āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā

mām evānuttamāṁ gatim

udārāḥ—magnanimous; sarve—all; eva—certainly; ete—these; jñānī—one who is in
knowledge; tu—but; ātmā eva—just like Myself; me—Mine; matam—opinion;
āsthitaḥ—situated; saḥ—he; hi—certainly; yukta-ātmā—engaged in devotional
service; mām—unto Me; eva—certainly; anuttamām—the highest goal;
gatim—destination.

**TRANSLATION**

All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is situated in
knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Being engaged in My
transcendental service, he attains Me.

**PURPORT**

It is not that other devotees who are less complete in knowledge are not dear to
the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous because anyone who comes to the
Lord for any purpose is called a mahātmā or great soul. The devotees who want
some benefit out of devotional service are accepted by the Lord because there is
an exchange of affection. Out of affection they ask the Lord for some material
benefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that they also advance in
devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge is considered to be very
dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to serve the Supreme Lord with love
and devotion. Such a devotee cannot live a second without contacting or serving
the Supreme Lord. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is very fond of His devotee and
cannot be separated from him.

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.4.57), the Lord says:

ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno hy asvatantra iva dvija sādhubhir grasta-hṛdayo bhaktair
bhakta-jana-priyaḥ

“The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the heart of the
devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I also cannot forget
the devotee. There is a very intimate relationship between Me and the pure
devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge are never out of spiritual touch, and
therefore they are very much dear to Me.”

### 7.19


bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

bahūnām—many; janmanām—births; ante—after; jñānavān—he possessing knowledge;
mām—unto Me; prapadyate—surrenders; vāsudevaḥ—cause of all causes; sarvam—all;
iti—thus; saḥ—such; mahātmā—great soul; sudurlabhaḥ—very rare.

**TRANSLATION**

After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto
Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul
is very rare.

**PURPORT**

The living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental rituals
after many, many births, may actually become situated in transcendental pure
knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of
spiritual realization. In the beginning of spiritual realization, while one is
trying to give up one’s attachment to materialism, there is some leaning towards
impersonalism, but when one is further advanced he can understand that there are
activities in the spiritual life and that these activities constitute devotional
service. Realizing this, he becomes attached to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and surrenders to Him. At such a time one can understand that Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is everything, that He is the cause of all causes and that this
material manifestation is not independant from Him. He realizes the material
world to be a perverted reflection of spiritual variegatedness and realizes that
in everything there is a relationship with the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. Thus he
thinks of everything in relation to Vāsudeva, or Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such a universal
vision of Vāsudeva precipitates one’s full surrender to the Supreme Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as the highest goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.

This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter of Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad: “In this body there are powers of speaking, of seeing, of hearing, of
mental activities, etc. But these are not important if not related to the
Supreme Lord. And because Vāsudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vāsudeva,
the devotee surrenders in full knowledge.” (Cf. Bhagavad-gītā 7.17 and 11.40)


### 7.20


kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ

prapadyante ’nya-devatāḥ

taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya

prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā

kamaiḥ—by desires; taiḥ—by those; taiḥ—by those; hṛta—distorted;
jñānāḥ—knowledge; prapadyante—surrender; anya—other; devatāḥ—demigods; tam—that;
tam—that; niyamam—rules; āsthāya—following; prakṛtyā—by nature;
niyatāḥ—controlled; svayā—by their own.

**TRANSLATION**

Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods and
follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own
natures.

**PURPORT**

Those who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the Supreme
Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as the material contamination
is not completely washed off, they are by nature nondevotees. But even those who
have material desires and who resort to the Supreme Lord are not so much
attracted by external nature; because of approaching the right goal, they soon
become free from all material lust. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is recommended
that whether one is free from all material desires, or is full of material
desires, or desires liberation from material contamination, or is a pure devotee
and has no desire for material sense gratification, he should in all cases
surrender to Vāsudeva and worship Him.

It is said in the Bhāgavatam that less intelligent people who have lost their
spiritual sense take shelter of demigods for immediate fulfillment of material
desires. Generally, such people do not go to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
because they are in particular modes of nature (ignorance and passion) and
therefore worship various demigods. Following the rules and regulations of
worship, they are satisfied. The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small
desires and do not know how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of the
Supreme Lord is not misguided. Because in Vedic literature there are
recommendations for worshiping different gods for different purposes (e.g., a
diseased man is recommended to worship the sun), those who are not devotees of
the Lord think that for certain purposes demigods are better than the Supreme
Lord. But a pure devotee knows that the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa is the master of all.
In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that only the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is master and all others are servants. Therefore a pure devotee
never goes to demigods for satisfaction of his material needs. He depends on the
Supreme Lord. And the pure devotee is satisfied with whatever He gives.

### 7.21


yo yo yāṁ yāṁ tanuṁ bhaktaḥ

śraddhayārcitum icchati

tasya tasyācalāṁ śraddhāṁ

tām eva vidadhāmy aham

yaḥ—that; yaḥ—that; yām—which; yām—which; tanum—form of the demigods;
bhaktaḥ—devotee; śraddhayā—with faith; arcitum—to worship; icchati—desires;
tasya—of that; tasya—of that; acalām—steady; śraddhām—faith; tam—him;
eva—surely; vidadhāmi—give; aham—I.

**TRANSLATION**

I am in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to worship the
demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to some
particular deity.

**PURPORT**

God has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires to have
material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such facilities from the
material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul in everyone’s heart,
understands and gives facilities to such persons. As the supreme father of all
living entities, He does not interfere with their independence, but gives all
facilities so that they can fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the
all-powerful God gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this
material world and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. The
answer is that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such facilities,
then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore He gives everyone full
independence—whatever one likes—but His ultimate instruction we find in the
Bhagavad-gītā: man should give up all other engagements and fully surrender unto
Him. That will make man happy.

Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannot worship the
demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow any benediction without
the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade of grass moves without the will of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Generally, persons who are distressed in the
material world go to the demigods, as they are advised in the Vedic literature.
A person wanting some particular thing may worship such and such a demigod. For
example, a diseased person is recommended to worship the sun-god; a person
wanting education may worship the goddess of learning, Sarasvatī; and a person
wanting a beautiful wife may worship the goddess Umā, the wife of Lord Śiva. In
this way there are recommendations in the śāstras (Vedic scriptures) for
different modes of worship of different demigods. And because a particular
living entity wants to enjoy a particular material facility, the Lord inspires
him with a strong desire to achieve that benediction from that particular
demigod, and so he successfully receives the benediction. The particular mode of
the devotional attitude of the living entity toward a particular type of demigod
is also arranged by the Supreme Lord. The demigods cannot infuse the living
entities with such an affinity, but because He is the Supreme Lord or the
Supersoul who is present in the heart of all living entities, Kṛṣṇa gives
impetus to man to worship certain demigods. The demigods are actually different
parts of the universal body of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no
independence. In the Vedic literature (Taittirīya Upaniṣad, First Anuvāka) it is
stated: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead as Supersoul is also present within
the heart of the demigod; therefore He arranges through the demigod to fulfill
the desire of the living entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are
dependant on the supreme wil1. They are not independant.”
