### 7.22


sa tayā śraddhayā yuktas

tasyārādhanam īhate

labhate ca tataḥ kāmān

mayaiva vihitān hi tān

saḥ—he; tayā—with that; śraddhayā—with faith; yuktaḥ—endowed; tasya—his;
ārādhanam—worship; īhate—seeks; labhate—obtains; ca—and; tataḥ—from which;
kāmān—desires; mayā—by Me; eva—alone; vihitān—regulated; hi—for; tān—those.

TRANSLATION

Endowed with such a faith, he seeks favors of a particular demigod and obtains
his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me alone.

PURPORT

The demigods cannot award benediction to the devotees without the permission of
the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget that everything is the property
of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do not forget. So the worship of demigods
and achievement of desired results are not due to the demigods but to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by arrangement. The less intelligent living
entity does not know this, and therefore he foolishly goes to the demigods for
some benefit. But the pure devotee, when in need of something, prays only to the
Supreme Lord. Asking for material benefit, however, is not a sign of a pure
devotee. A living entity goes to the demigods usually because he is mad to
fulfill his lust. This happens when something undue is desired by the living
entity, and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the desire. In the
Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that one who worships the Supreme Lord and at the
same time desires material enjoyment is contradictory in his desires. Devotional
service of the Supreme Lord and the worship of a demigod cannot be on the same
platform because worship of a demigod is material and devotional service to the
Supreme Lord is completely spiritual.

For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material desires are
impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore not awarded the material
benefits desired by less intelligent living entities who prefer to worship
demigods of the material world rather than engage in devotional service of the
Supreme Lord.

### 7.23


antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ

tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām

devān deva-yajo yānti

mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

antavat tu—limited and temporary; phalam—fruits; teṣām—their; tat—that;
bhavati—becomes; alpa-medhasām—of those of small intelligence; devān—demigods’
planets; deva-yajaḥ—worshipers of demigods; yānti—achieve; mat—My;
bhaktāḥ—devotees; yānti—attain; mām—unto Me; api—surely.

TRANSLATION

Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and
temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the demigods, but
My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.

PURPORT

Some commentators on the Gītā say that one who worships a demigod can reach the
Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that the worshipers of demigods go
to the different planetary systems where various demigods are situated, just as
a worshiper of the sun achieves the sun or a worshiper of the demigod of the
moon achieves the moon. Similarly, if anyone wants to worship a demigod like
Indra, he can attain that particular god’s planet. It is not that everyone,
regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped, will reach the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is clearly stated that the worshipers of
demigods go to different planets in the material world, but the devotee of the
Supreme Lord goes directly to the supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.

Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different parts of the
body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achieved by worshiping
them. However, worshipers of the demigods are less intelligent because they
don’t know to what part of the body food must be supplied. Some of them are so
foolish that they claim that there are many parts and many ways to supply food.
This isn’t very sanguine. Can anyone supply food to the body through the ears or
eyes? They do not know that these demigods are different parts of the universal
body of the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they believe that each and
every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.

Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary living entities
are also. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that the brāhmaṇas are the head
of the Supreme Lord, the kṣatriyas are the arms, etc., and that all serve
different functions. Regardless of the situation, if one knows that both the
demigods and himself are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is
perfect. But if he does not understand this, he achieves different planets where
the demigods reside. This is not the same destination the devotee reaches.

The results achieved by the demigods’ benedictions are perishable because within
this material world the planets, the demigods and their worshipers are all
perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in this verse that all results
achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable, and therefore such worship is
performed by the less intelligent living entity. Because the pure devotee
engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service of the Supreme Lord
achieves eternal blissful existence that is full of knowledge, his achievements
and those of the common worshiper of the demigods are different. The Supreme
Lord is unlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited. Therefore the
mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.

### 7.24


avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ

manyante mām abuddhayaḥ

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mamāvyayam anuttamam

avyaktam—nonmanifested; vyaktim—personality; āpannam—achieved; manyante—think;
mām—unto Me; abuddhayaḥ—less intelligent persons; param—supreme; bhāvam—state of
being; ajānantaḥ—without knowing; mama—My; avyayam—imperishable; anuttamam—the
finest.

TRANSLATION

Unintelligent men, who know Me not, think that I have assumed this form and
personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My higher nature,
which is changeless and supreme.

PURPORT

Those who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less intelligent
persons, and here the impersonalists are similarly described. Lord Kṛṣṇa in His
personal form is here speaking before Arjuna, and still, due to ignorance,
impersonalists argue that the Supreme Lord ultimately has no form. Yāmunācārya,
a great devotee of the Lord in the disciplic succession from Rāmānujācārya, has
written two very appropriate verses in this connection. He says, “My dear Lord,
devotees like Vyāsadeva and Nārada know You to be the Personality of Godhead. By
understanding different Vedic literatures, one can come to know Your
characteristics, Your form and Your activities, and one can thus understand that
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But those who are in the modes of
passion and ignorance, the demons, the nondevotees, cannot understand You. They
are unable to understand You. However expert such nondevotees may be in
discussing Vedānta and the Upaniṣads and other Vedic literatures, it is not
possible for them to understand the Personality of Godhead.”

In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is stated that the Personality of Godhead cannot be
understood simply by study of the Vedānta literature. Only by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme be known. Therefore in this
verse it is clearly stated that not only the worshipers of the demigods are less
intelligent, but those nondevotees who are engaged in Vedānta and speculation on
Vedic literature without any tinge of true Kṛṣṇa consciousness are also less
intelligent, and for them it is not possible to understand God’s personal
nature. Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal are described as asuras, which means one who does not know the
ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated
that supreme realization begins from the impersonal Brahman and then rises to
the localized Supersoul—but the ultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the
Personality of Godhead. Modern impersonalists are still less intelligent, for
they do not even follow their great predecessor, Śaṅkarācārya, who has
specifically stated that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the Supreme Truth, think Kṛṣṇa to be only
the son of Devakī and Vasudeva, or a prince, or a powerful living entity. This
is also condemned in Bhagavad-gītā: “Only the fools regard Me as an ordinary
person.” The fact is that no one can understand Kṛṣṇa without rendering
devotional service and without developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The Gītā confirms
this.

One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, or His form,
quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussing Vedic literature.
One must understand Him by devotional service. When one is fully engaged in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, beginning by chanting the mahāmantra—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—then
only can one understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nondevotee
impersonalists think that Kṛṣṇa has a body made of this material nature and that
all His activities, His form and everything, are māyā. These impersonalists are
known as Māyāvādī. They do not know the ultimate truth.

The twentieth verse clearly states: “Those who are blinded by lusty desires
surrender unto the different demigods.” It is accepted that besides the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, there are demigods who have their different planets (### .
7.23), and the Lord also has a planet. It is also stated that the worshipers of
the demigods go to the different planets of the demigods, and those who are
devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa go to the Kṛṣṇaloka planet. Although this is clearly
stated, the foolish impersonalists still maintain that the Lord is formless and
that these forms are impositions. From the study of the Gītā does it appear that
the demigods and their abodes are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigods nor
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They are all persons;
Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He has His own planet, and
the demigods have theirs.

Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless and that form
is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here that it is not imposed.
From the Gītā we can clearly understand that the forms of the demigods and the
form of the Supreme Lord are simultaneously existing and that Lord Kṛṣṇa is
sac-cid-ānanda, eternal blissful knowledge. The Vedas also confirm that the
Supreme Absolute Truth is ānandamaya, or full of blissful pleasure, and that He
is abhyāsāt, by nature the reservoir of unlimited auspicious qualities. And in
the Gītā the Lord says that although He is aja (unborn), He still appears. These
are the facts that we should understand from the Gītā. We cannot understand how
the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of
the impersonalist monist is false as far as the statements of the Gītā are
concerned. It is clear herein that the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord Kṛṣṇa, has
both form and personality.

### 7.25


nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ

mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti

loko mām ajam avyayam

na—nor; aham—I; prakāśaḥ—manifest; sarvasya—to everyone; yoga-māyā—internal
potency; samāvṛtaḥ—covered; mūḍhaḥ—foolish; ayam—this; na—not; abhijānāti—can
understand; lokaḥ—such less intelligent persons; mām—Me; ajam—unborn;
avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by
My eternal creative potency [yoga-māyā]; and so the deluded world knows Me not,
who am unborn and infallible.

PURPORT

lt may be argued that since Kṛṣṇa was present on this earth and was visible to
everyone, then why isn’t He manifest to everyone now? But actually He was not
manifest to everyone. When Kṛṣṇa was present there were only a few people who
could understand Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the assembly
of Kurus, when Śiśupāla spoke against Kṛṣṇa being elected president of the
assembly, Bhīṣma supported Him and proclaimed Him to be the Supreme God.
Similarly, the Pāṇḍavas and a few others knew that He was the Supreme, but not
everyone. He was not revealed to the nondevotees and the common man. Therefore
in the Gītā Kṛṣṇa says that but for His pure devotees, all men consider Him to
be like themselves. He was manifest only to His devotees as the reservoir of all
pleasure. But to others, to unintelligent nondevotees, He was covered by His
eternal potency.

In the prayers of Kuntī in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.8.18), it is said that the
Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-māyā and thus ordinary people cannot
understand Him. Kuntī prays: “O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire
universe, and devotional service to You is the highest religious principle.
Therefore, I pray that You will also maintain me. Your transcendental form is
covered by the yoga-māyā. The brahmajyoti is the covering of the internal
potency. May You kindly remove this glowing effulgence that impedes my seeing
Your sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha, Your eternal form of bliss and knowledge.”

This yoga-māyā curtain is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of the Gītā.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form of bliss and
knowledge is covered by the eternal potency of brahmajyoti and the less
intelligent impersonalists cannot see the Supreme on this account. Also in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.7) there is this prayer by Brahmā: “O Supreme
Personality of Godhead, O Supersoul, O master of all mystery, who can calculate
Your potency and pastimes in this world? You are always expanding Your eternal
potency, and therefore no one can understand You. Learned scientists and learned
scholars can examine the atomic constitution of the material world or even the
planets, but still they are unable to calculate Your energy and potency,
although You are present before them.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Kṛṣṇa, is not only unborn, but He is avyaya, inexhaustible. His eternal form is
bliss and knowledge, and His energies are all inexhaustible.

### 7.26


vedāhaṁ samatītāni

vartamānāni cārjuna

bhaviṣyāṇi ca bhūtāni

māṁ tu veda na kaścana

veda—know; aham—I; sama—equally; atītāni—past; vartamānāni—present; ca—and;
arjuna—O Arjuna; bhaviṣyāṇi—future; ca—also; bhūtāni—living entities; mām—Me;
tu—but; veda—knows; na—not; kaścana—anyone.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that has
happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all things that
are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one knows.

PURPORT

Here the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated. If Kṛṣṇa,
the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is considered by the
impersonalists to be māyā, to be material, then He would, like the living
entity, change His body and forget everything in His past life. Anyone with a
material body cannot remember his past life, nor can he foretell his future
life, nor can he predict the outcome of his present life; therefore he cannot
know what is happening in past, present and future. Unless one is liberated from
material contamination, he cannot know past, present and future.
