### 7.27


icchā-dveṣa-samutthena

dvandva-mohena bhārata

sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ

sarge yānti parantapa

icchā—desire; dveṣa—hate; samutthena—born; dvandva—duality; mohena—overcome;
bhārata—O scion of Bharata; sarva—all; bhūtāni—living entities; sammoham—into
delusion; sarge—in creation; yānti—go; parantapa—O conquerer of enemies.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conquerer of the foe, all living entities are
born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desire and hate.

PURPORT

The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of subordination
to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one is deluded into separation
from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlled by illusory energy and cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The illusory energy is manifested
in the duality of desire and hate. Due to desire and hate, the ignorant person
wants to become one with the Supreme Lord and envies Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Pure devotees, who are not so deluded or contaminated by
desire and hate, can understand that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears by His internal
potencies, but those who are deluded by duality and nescience think that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by material energies. This is their
misfortune. Such deluded persons, symptomatically, dwell in dualities of
dishonor and honor, misery and happiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure
and pain, etc., thinking, “This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of
this house; I am the husband of this wife.” These are the dualities of delusion.
Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolish and therefore
cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 7.28


yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

yeṣām—whose; tu—but; anta-gatam—completely eradicated; pāpam—sin; janānām—of the
persons; puṇya—pious; karmaṇām—previous activities; te—they; dvandva—duality;
moha—delusion; nirmuktāḥ—free from; bhajante—worship; mām—Me; dṛḍha-vratāḥ—with
determination.

TRANSLATION

Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful
actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of
delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination.

PURPORT

Those eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are mentioned in
this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish and deceitful, it is
very difficult to transcend the duality of desire and hate. Only those who have
passed their lives in practicing the regulative principles of religion, who have
acted piously and have conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service
and gradually rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Then, gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual platform. This
elevation is possible in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the association of pure devotees
who can deliver one from delusion.

It is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that if one actually wants to be liberated
he must render service to the devotees; but one who associates with
materialistic people is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence.
All the devotees of the Lord traverse this earth just to recover the conditioned
souls from their delusion. The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their
constitutional position as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest
violation of God’s law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutional
position, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality or to be
fully engaged in His transcendental loving service with determination.

### 7.29


jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya

mām āśritya yatanti ye

te brahma tad viduḥ kṛtsnam

adhyātmaṁ karma cākhilam

jarā—old age; maraṇa—death; mokṣāya—for the purpose of liberation; mām—unto Me;
āśritya—taking shelter of; yatanti—endeavor; ye—all those; te—such persons;
brahma—Brahman; tat—actually that; viduḥ—they know; kṛtsnam—everything;
adhyātmam—transcendental; karma—fruitive activities; ca—also; akhilam—entirely.

TRANSLATION

Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and death
take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually Brahman because they
entirely know everything about transcendental and fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Birth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not the
spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease for the spiritual
body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one of the associates of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages in eternal devotional service, is
really liberated. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi: I am spirit. It is said that one should
understand that he is Brahman—spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is
also in devotional service, as described in this verse. The pure devotees are
transcendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they know everything
about transcendental and material activities.

Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the transcendental
service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, and by the grace of the
Supreme Lord, when they are fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, they actually enjoy spiritual
association with the Supreme Lord. But those who are worshipers of demigods
never reach the Supreme Lord in His supreme planet. Even the less intelligent
Brahman-realized persons cannot reach the supreme planet of Kṛṣṇa known as
Goloka Vṛndāvana. Only persons who perform activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
(mām āśritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because they are
actually endeavoring to reach the Kṛṣṇa planet. Such persons have no misgivings
about Kṛṣṇa, and thus they are factually Brahman.

Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arcā of the Lord or who are
engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation from material bondage,
also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports of Brahman, adhibhūta, etc.,
as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.

### 7.30


sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ

sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ

prayāṇa-kāle ’pi ca māṁ

te vidur yukta-cetasaḥ

sa-adhibhūta—the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam—underlying all the demigods; mām—Me; sa-adhiyajñam—sustaining all
sacrifices; ca—and; ye—those; viduḥ—know; prayāṇa—of death; kāle—at the time;
api—even; ca—and; mām—Me; te—they; viduḥ—know; yukta-cetasaḥ—with steadfast
mind.

TRANSLATION

Those who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of the
material manifestation, who know Me as the one underlying all the demigods and
as the one sustaining all sacrifices, can, with steadfast mind, understand and
know Me even at the time of death.

PURPORT

Persons acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are never entirely deviated from the path
of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the transcendental
association of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can understand how the Supreme Lord is
the governing principle of the material manifestation and even of the demigods.
Gradually, by such transcendental association, one becomes convinced of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, and at the time of death such a Kṛṣṇa
conscious person can never forget Kṛṣṇa. Naturally he is thus promoted to the
planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vṛndāvana.

This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fully Kṛṣṇa
conscious person. The beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is association of persons
who are Kṛṣṇa conscious. Such association is spiritual and puts one directly in
touch with the Supreme Lord, and, by His grace, one can understand Kṛṣṇa to be
the Supreme God. At the same time one can really understand the constitutional
position of the living entity and how the living entity forgets Kṛṣṇa and
becomes entangled in material activities. By gradual development of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in good association, the living entity can understand that due to
forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa he has become conditioned by the laws of material nature.
He can also understand that this human form of life is an opportunity to regain
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and that it should be fully utilized to attain the causeless
mercy of the Supreme Lord.

Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress, the
inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledge of Brahman,
knowledge of Paramātmā, liberation from birth, death and diseases, and worship
of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actually elevated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
does not care for the different processes. He simply directly engages himself in
activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and thereby factually attains his
constitutional position as eternal servitor of Lord Kṛṣṇa. In such a situation
he takes pleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotional
service. He is convinced that by doing so, all his objectives will be fulfilled.
This determined faith is called dṛḍha-vrata, and it is the beginning of
bhakti-yoga or transcendental loving service. That is the verdict of all
scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Gītā is the substance of that
conviction.


Attaining the Supreme

### 8.1


arjuna uvāca

kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ

kiṁ karma puruṣottama

adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam

adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; kim—what; tat—that; brahma—Brahman; kim—what;
adhyātmam—the self; kim—what; karma—fruitive activities; puruṣottama—O Supreme
Person; adhibhūtam—the material manifestation; ca—and; kim—what; proktam—is
called; adhidaivam—the demigods; kim—what; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is the self?
What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And what are
the demigods? Please explain this to me.

PURPORT

In this chapter Lord Kṛṣṇa answers these different questions of Arjuna beginning
with, “What is Brahman?” The Lord also explains karma, fruitive activities,
devotional service and yoga principles, and devotional service in its pure form.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains that the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as
Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. In addition, the living entity, individual
soul, is also called Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about ātmā, which refers to
body, soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, ātmā refers to the mind,
soul, body and senses also.

Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Puruṣottama, Supreme Person, which
means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friend but to the
Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority able to give definitive
answers.

### 8.2


adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra

dehe ’smin madhusūdana

prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ

jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ

adhiyajñaḥ—the Lord of sacrifice; katham—how; kaḥ—who; atra—here; dehe—in the
body; asmin—in this; madhusūdana—O Madhusūdana; prayāṇa-kāle—at the time of
death; ca—and; katham—how; jñeyaḥ—be known; asi—You can; niyata-ātmabhiḥ—by the
self-controlled.

TRANSLATION

How does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body, and in which part does He
live, O Madhusūdana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know You at
the time of death?

PURPORT

The Lord of sacrifice accepts Indra and Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is the chief of the primal
demigods, including Brahmā and Śiva, and Indra is the chief of the
administrative demigods. Both Indra and Viṣṇu are worshiped by yajña
performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actually the Lord of yajña
(sacrifice), and how is the Lord residing within the body of the living entity.

Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusūdana because Kṛṣṇa once killed a demon named
Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature of doubts, should not
have arisen in the mind of Arjuna because Arjuna is a Kṛṣṇa conscious devotee.
Therefore these doubts are like demons. Since Kṛṣṇa is so expert in killing
demons, Arjuna here addresses Him as Madhusūdana so that Kṛṣṇa might kill the
demonic doubts that arise in Arjuna’s mind.

Now the word prayāṇa-kāle in this verse is very significant because whatever we
do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjuna fears that at the time of
death, those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness will forget the Supreme Lord because
at such a time body functions are disrupted and the mind may be in a
panic-stricken state. Therefore Mahārāja Kulaśekhara, a great devotee, prays,
“My dear Lord, may I die immediately now that I’m healthy so that the swan of my
mind may enter into the stem of Thy lotus feet.” This metaphor is used because
the swan often takes pleasure in entering the stem of the lotus
flower-similarly, the mind of the pure devotee is drawn to the lotus feet of the
Lord. Mahārāja Kulaśekhara fears that at the moment of death his throat will be
so choked up that he will not be able to chant the holy names, so it is better
to “die immediately.” Arjuna questions how one’s mind can remain fixed on
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet at such times.
