### 8.3


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ

svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate

bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo

visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
akṣaram—indestructible; brahma—Brahman; paramam—transcendental;
svabhāvaḥ—eternal nature; adhyātmam—the self; ucyate—is called;
bhūta-bhāva-udbhava-karaḥ—action producing the material bodies of the living
entities; visargaḥ—creation; karma—fruitive activities; saṁjñitaḥ—is called.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said, The indestructible, transcendental living entity is
called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called the self. Action pertaining to
the development of these material bodies is called karma, or fruitive
activities.

PURPORT

Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution is not
changed at any time. But beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman. Brahman refers to
the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The constitutional position of the living entity is different from the position
he takes in the material world. In material consciousness, his nature is to try
to be the lord of matter, but in spiritual (Kṛṣṇa) consciousness, his position
is to serve the Supreme. When the living entity is in material consciousness, he
has to take on various bodies in the material world. That is called karma, or
varied creation by the force of material consciousness.

In Vedic literature the living entity is called jīvātmā and Brahman, but he is
never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jīvātmā) takes different
positions—sometimes he merges into the dark material nature and identifies
himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himself with the superior
spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the Supreme Lord’s marginal energy.
According to his identification with material or spiritual nature, he receives a
material or spiritual body. In material nature he may take a body from any of
the 8,400,000 species of life, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In
material nature he is sometimes manifested as a man, demigod, an animal, a
beast, bird, etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets
and enjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajña), but when
his merit is exhausted, he returns to earth again in the form of a man.

ln the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specific sacrifices to
attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reaches them. When the merit
of sacrifice is exhausted, then the living entity descends to earth in the form
of rain, then takes on the form of grains, and the grains are eaten by man and
transformed into semen, which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity
once again attains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat the same
cycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on the material
path. The Kṛṣṇa conscious person, however, avoids such sacrifices. He takes
directly to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and thereby prepares himself to return to
Godhead.

Impersonalist commentators on the Gītā unreasonably assume that Brahman takes
the form of jīva in the material world, and to substantiate this they refer to
Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gītā. But this verse also speaks of the living
entity as “an eternal fragment of Myself.” The fragment of God, the living
entity, may fall down into the material world, but the Supreme Lord (Acyuta)
never falls down. Therefore this assumption that the Supreme Brahman assumes the
form of jīva is not acceptable. It is important to remember that in Vedic
literature Brahman (the living entity) is distinguished from Parabrahman (the
Supreme Lord).

### 8.4


adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ

puruṣaś cādhidaivatam

adhiyajño ’ham evātra

dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara

adhibhūtam—the physical manifestation; kṣaraḥ—constantly changing;
bhāvaḥ—nature; puruṣaḥ—the universal form; ca—and; adhidaivatam—including all
demigods like the sun and moon; adhiyajñaḥ—the Supersoul; aham—I (Kṛṣṇa);
eva—certainly; atra—in this; dehe—body; deha-bhṛtām—of the embodied; vara—the
Supreme.

TRANSLATION

Physical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe is the cosmic
form of the Supreme Lord, and I am that Lord represented as the Supersoul,
dwelling in the heart of every embodied being.

PURPORT

The physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally pass
through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for some duration,
they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then they vanish. This physical
nature is called adhibhūtam. Because it is created at a certain point and will
be annihilated at a certain point, the conception of the universal form of the
Supreme Lord that includes all the demigods and their different planets is
called adhidaivatam. The individual soul (jīva) accompanies the body. The
Supersoul, a plenary representation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, is called the Paramātmā or
adhiyajña and is situated in the heart. The word eva is particularly important
in the context of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that the
Paramātmā is not different from Him. The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is the witness of the individual
soul’s activities and is the source of consciousness. The Supersoul gives the
jīva an opportunity to act freely, and He witnesses his activities. The
functions of all these different manifestations of the Supreme Lord
automatically become clarified for the pure Kṛṣṇa conscious devotee engaged in
transcendental service of the Lord. The gigantic universal form of the Lord
called adhidaivatam is contemplated by the neophyte who cannot approach the
Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul. The neophyte is advised to
contemplate the universal form whose legs are considered the lowet planets and
whose eyes are considered the sun and moon, and whose head is considered the
upper planetary system.

### 8.5


anta-kāle ca mām eva

smaran muktvā kalevaram

yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ

yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ

anta-kāle—at the end of life; ca—also; mām—unto Me; eva—certainly;
smaran—remembering; muktvā—quitting; kalevaram—the body; yaḥ—he who;
prayāti—goes; saḥ—he; mad-bhāvam—My nature; yati—achieves; na—not; asti—there
is; atra—here; saṁśayaḥ—doubt.

TRANSLATION

And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering Me alone, at once
attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

In this verse the importance of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is stressed. Anyone who
quits his body in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is at once transferred to the
transcendental abode of the Supreme Lord. The word smaran (remembering) is
important. Remembrance of Kṛṣṇa is not possible for the impure soul who has not
practiced Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service. To remember Kṛṣṇa one
should chant the mahāmantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/
Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, incessantly, following in the
footsteps of Lord Caitanya, being more tolerant than the tree, humbler than the
grass and offering all respect to others without requiring respect in return. In
such a way one will be able to depart from the body successfully remembering
Kṛṣṇa and so attain the supreme goal.

### 8.6


yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ

yam yam—whatever; vā—either; api—also; smaran—remembering; bhāvam—nature;
tyajati—give up; ante—at the end; kalevaram—this body; tam tam—similar;
eva—certainly; eti—gets; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; sadā—always; tat—that;
bhāva—state of being; bhāvitaḥ—remembering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will
attain without fail.

PURPORT

The process of changing one’s nature at the critical moment of death is here
explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Mahārāja Bharata thought
of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred to that form of life.
However, as a deer, Mahārāja Bharata could remember his past activities. Of
course the cumulative effect of the thoughts and actions of one’s life
influences one’s thoughts at the moment of death; therefore the actions of this
life determine one’s future state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed
in Kṛṣṇa’s service,then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not
physical. Therefore the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa is the best process for
successfully changing one’s state of being to transcendental life.

### 8.7


tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu

mām anusmara yudhya ca

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ

tasmāt—therefore; sarveṣu—always; kāleṣu—time; mām—unto Me; anusmara—go on
remembering; yudhya—fight; ca—also; mayi—unto Me; arpita—surrender; manaḥ—mind;
buddhiḥ—intellect; mām—unto Me; eva—surely; eṣyasi—will attain; asaṁśayaḥ—beyond
a doubt.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Kṛṣṇa and at the
same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities
dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you will attain Me
without doubt.

PURPORT

This instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in material
activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up his prescribed duties
or engagements. One can continue them and at the same time think of Kṛṣṇa by
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. This will free one from material contamination and engage
the mind and intelligence in Kṛṣṇa. By chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names, one will be
transferred to the supreme planet, Kṛṣṇaloka, without a doubt.

### 8.8


abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena

cetasā nānya-gāminā

paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ

yāti pārthānucintayan

abhyāsa—practice; yoga-yuktena—being engaged in meditation; cetasā—by the mind
and intelligence; na anya-gāminā—without being deviated; paramam—the Supreme;
puruṣam—Personality of Godhead; divyam—transcendental; yāti—achieves; pārtha—O
son of Pṛthā; anucintayan—constantly thinking of.

TRANSLATION

He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind constantly
engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O Pārtha [Arjuna], is
sure to reach Me.

PURPORT

In this verse Lord Kṛṣṇa stresses the importance of remembering Him. One’s
memory of Kṛṣṇa is revived by chanting the mahāmantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa. By this
practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration of the Supreme Lord, one’s
ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mystic meditation is very easy to
practice, and it helps one attain the Supreme Lord. Puruṣam means enjoyer.
Although living entities belong to the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, they
are in material contamination. They think themselves enjoyers, but they are not
the supreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that the supreme enjoyer is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different manifestations and plenary
expansions as Nārāyaṇa, Vāsudeva, etc.

The devotees can constantly think of the object of worship, the Supreme Lord, in
any of His features, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, etc., by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. This
practice will purify him, and at the end of his life, due to his constant
chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom of God. Yoga practice is
meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa one fixes
his mind always on the Supreme Lord. The mind is fickle, and therefore it is
necessary to engage the mind by force to think of Kṛṣṇa. One example often given
is that of the caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so is
transformed into a butterfly in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think
of Kṛṣṇa, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the same
bodily constitution as Kṛṣṇa.
