### 8.9


kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram

aṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥ

sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam

āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt

kavim—one who knows everything; purāṇam—the oldest; anuśāsitāram—the controller;
aṇoḥ—of the atom; aṇīyāṁsam—smaller than; anusmaret—always thinking; yaḥ—one
who; sarvasya—of everything; dhātāram—maintainer; acintya—inconceivable;
rūpam—form; āditya-varṇam—illuminated like the sun; tamasaḥ—of the darkness;
parastāt—transcendental.

**TRANSLATION**

One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows everything, as
He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than the smallest,
who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material conception, who
is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous like the sun and,
being transcendental, is beyond this material nature.

**PURPORT**

The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The foremost
point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannot meditate on something
impersonal or void. That is very difficult. The process of thinking of Kṛṣṇa,
however, is very easy and is factually stated herein. First of all, He is
puruṣa, spiritual, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, and is described herein as kavim; that is, He
knows past, present and future and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest
personality because He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of
Him. He is also the supreme controller of the universe, maintainer and
instructor of humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The living entity is
one 10,000th part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is so inconceivably small
that He enters into the heart of this particle. Therefore He is called smaller
than the smallest. As the Supreme, He can enter into the atom and into the heart
of the smallest and control him as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still
all-pervading and is maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary systems
are sustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in the air. It
is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable energy, is sustaining
all these big planets and systems of galaxies. The word acintya (inconceivable)
is very significant in this connection. God’s energy is beyond our conception,
beyond our thinking jurisdiction, and is therefore called inconceivable
(acintya). Who can argue this point? He pervades this material world and yet is
beyond it. We cannot even comprehend this material world, which is insignificant
compared to the spiritual world—so how can we comprehend what is beyond? Acintya
means that which is beyond this material world, that which our argument, logic
and philosophical speculation cannot touch, that which is inconceivable.
Therefore intelligent persons, avoiding useless argument and speculation, should
accept what is stated in scriptures like the Vedas, Gītā, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
and follow the principles they set down. This will lead one to understanding.

### 8.10


prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena

bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva

bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak

sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam

prayāṇa-kāle—at the time of death; manasā—by the mind; acalena—without being
deviated; bhaktyā—in full devotion; yuktaḥ—engaged; yoga-balena—by the power of
mystic yoga; ca—also; eva—certainly; bhruvoḥ—between the two eyebrows;
madhye—in; prāṇam—the life air; āveśya—establishing; samyak—completely; saḥ—he;
tam—that; param—transcendental; puruṣam—Personality of Godhead; upaiti—achieves;
divyam—in the spiritual kingdom.

**TRANSLATION**

One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and in
full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord, will certainly
attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

**PURPORT**

In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind must be
fixed in devotion on the Supreme Godhead. For those practiced in yoga, it is
recommended that they raise the life force between the eyebrows, but for a pure
devotee who does not practice such yoga, the mind should always be engaged in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that at death he can remember the Supreme by His grace.
This is explained in verse fourteen.

The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this verse because
without practice of yoga one cannot come to this transcendental state of being
at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember the Supreme Lord at death
unless he is practiced in some yoga system, especially the system of
bhakti-yoga. Since one’s mind at death is very disturbed, one should practice
transcendence through yoga during one’s life.

### 8.11


yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti

viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ

yad icchanto brahmacaryaṁ caranti

tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye

yat—that which; akṣaram—inexhaustible; veda-vidaḥ—a person conversant with the
Vedas; vadanti—say; viśanti—enters; yat—in which; yatayaḥ—great sages;
vīta-rāgāh—in the renounced order of life; yat—that which; icchantaḥ—desiring;
brahmacaryam—celibacy; caranti—practices; tat—that; te—unto you;
padam—situation; saṅgraheṇa—in summary; pravakṣye—I shall explain.

**TRANSLATION**

Persons learned in the Vedas, who utter omkāra and who are great sages in the
renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one practices
celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process by which one may attain
salvation.

**PURPORT**

Lord Kṛṣṇa explains that Brahman, although one without a second, has different
manifestations and features. For the impersonalists, the syllable om is
identical with Brahman. Kṛṣṇa here explains the impersonal Brahman in which the
renounced order of sages enter.

In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning, are taught
to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman by living with the
spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way they realize two of Brahman’s
features. This practice is very essential for the student’s advancement in
spiritual life, but at the moment such brahmacārī (unmarried celibate) life is
not at all possible. The social construction of the world has changed so much
that there is no possibility of one’s practicing celibacy from the beginning of
student life. Throughout the world there are many institutions for different
departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution where students
can be educated in the brahmacārī principles. Unless one practices celibacy,
advancement in spiritual life is very difficult. Therefore Lord Caitanya has
announced, according to the scriptural injunctions for this age of Kali, that no
process of realizing the Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy
name of Lord Kṛṣṇa: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma,
Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

### 8.12


sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya

mano hṛdi nirudhya ca

mūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam

āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām

sarva-dvārāṇi—all the doors of the body; saṁyamya—controlling; manaḥ—mind;
hṛdi—in the heart; nirudhya—confined; ca—also; mūrdhni—on the head;
ādhāya—fixed; ātmanaḥ—soul; prāṇam—the life air; āsthitaḥ—situated;
yoga-dhāraṇām—the yogic situation.

**TRANSLATION**

The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing
all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life air at
the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.

**PURPORT**

To practice yoga, as suggested here, one first has to close the door of all
sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyāhāra, or withdrawing the senses
from the sense objects. Sense organs for acquiring knowledge, such as the eyes,
ears, nose, tongue and touch, should be fully controlled and should not be
allowed to engage in self-gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the
Supersoul in the heart and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In
the Sixth Chapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before,
this practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. If one is always able to fix his mind on Kṛṣṇa in devotional
service, it is very easy for him to remain in an undisturbed transcendental
trance, or in samādhi.

### 8.13


oṁ ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma

vyāharan mām anusmaran

yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ

sa yāti paramāṁ gatim

om—the combination of letters, omkāra; iti—thus; eka-akṣaram—supreme,
indestructible; brahma—absolute; vyāharan—vibrating; mām—Me (Kṛṣṇa);
anusmaran—remembering; yaḥ—anyone; prayāti—leaves; tyajan—quitting; deham—this
body; saḥ—he; yāti—achieves; paramām—supreme; gatim—destination.

**TRANSLATION**

After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable om,
the supreme combination of letters, if one thinke of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual planets.

**PURPORT**

It is clearly stated here that om, Brahman, and Lord Kṛṣṇa are not different.
The impersonal sound of Kṛṣṇa is om, but the sound Hare Kṛṣṇa contains om. It is
clearly recommended in this age that if one quits his body at the end of this
life chanting the mahāmantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa, he will reach the spiritual planets.
Similarly, those who are devotees of Kṛṣṇa enter the Kṛṣṇa planet or Goloka
Vṛndāvana, whereas the impersonalists remain in the brahmajyoti. The
personalists also enter many innumerable planets in the spiritual sky known as
Vaikuṇṭhas.

### 8.14


ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ

yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ

tasyāhaṁ sulabhaḥ pārtha

nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ

ananya-cetāḥ—without deviation; satatam—always; yaḥ—anyone; mām—Me (Kṛṣṇa);
smarati—remembers; nityaśaḥ—regularly; tasya—to him; aham—I am; sulabhaḥ—very
easy to achieve; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; nitya—regularly; yuktasya—engaged;
yoginaḥ—of the devotee.

**TRANSLATION**

For one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Pṛthā,
because of his constant engagement in devotional service.

**PURPORT**

ln this verse the bhakti-yoga of the unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Godhead
is described. The preceeding verses mention four different kinds of devotees—the
distressed, the inquisitive, those who seek material gain, and the speculative
philosophers. Different processes of liberation from material entanglement have
also been described: karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and haṭha-yoga. But here
bhakti-yoga, without any mixture of these, is mentioned. In bhakti-yoga the
devotees desire nothing but Kṛṣṇa. The pure bhakti devotee does not desire
promotion to heavenly planets, nor does he seek salvation or liberation from
material entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In the
Caitanya-caritāmṛta the pure devotee is called niṣkāma, which means he has no
desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone, not to them who
strive for personal gain. The pure devotee only wants to please the Supreme
Lord, and so the Lord says that for anyone who is unflinchingly devoted to Him,
He is easy to attain. The devotee can render service to any of the
transcendental forms of the Supreme Lord, and he meets with none of the problems
that plague the practitioners of other yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and
pure and easy to perform. One can begin by simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is
very merciful to those who engage in His service, and He helps in various ways
that devotee who is fully surrendered to Him so he can understand Him as He is.
The Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so that ultimately the
devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.

The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is always thinking of
Kṛṣṇa without considering the time or place. There should be no impediments. He
should be able to carry out his service anywhere and at any time. Some say that
the devotee should remain in holy places like Vṛndāvana or some holy town where
the Lord lived, but a pure devotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere
of Vṛndāvana by his devotional service. It was Śrī Advaita who told Lord
Caitanya, “Wherever You are, O Lord—there is Vṛndavana.”

A pure devotee constantly remembers Kṛṣṇa and meditates upon Him. These are
qualifications of the pure devotee for whom the Lord is most easily attainable.
Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gītā recommends above all others. Generally,
the bhakti-yogīs are engaged in five different ways: 1) śānta-bhakta, engaged in
devotional service in neutrality; 2) dāsya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service
as servant; 3) sākhya-bhakta, engaged as friend; 4) vātsalya-bhakta, engaged as
parent; and 5) mādhurya-bhakta, engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord.
In any of these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget the Supreme
Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A pure devotee cannot forget
the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly, the Supreme Lord cannot forget His
pure devotee for a moment. This is the great blessing of the Kṛṣṇa conscious
process of chanting the mahāmantra, Hare Kṛṣṇa.

### 8.15


mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

mām—unto Me; upetya—achieving; punaḥ—again; janma—birth; duḥkha-ālayam—place of
miseries; aśāśvatam—temporary; na—never; āpnuvanti—attain; mahātmānaḥ—the great
souls; saṁsiddhim—perfection; paramām—ultimate; gatāḥ—achieved.

**TRANSLATION**

After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to
this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the
highest perfection.

**PURPORT**

Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth, old age,
disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highest perfection and attains
the supreme planet, Kṛṣṇaloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana, does not wish to return. The
supreme planet is described in Vedic literature as beyond our material vision,
and it is considered the highest goal. The mahātmās (great souls) receive
transcendental messages from the realized devotees and thus gradually develop
devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and become so absorbed in
transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of the
material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to any spiritual
planet. They only want Kṛṣṇa’s association and nothing else. Such great souls in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness attain the highest perfection of life. In other words, they
are the supreme souls.
