### 8.23


yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim

āvṛttiṁ caiva yoginaḥ

prayātā yānti taṁ kālaṁ

vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha

yatra—in that; kāle—time; tu—but; anāvṛttim—no return; āvṛttim—return; ca—also;
eva—certainly; yoginaḥ—of different kinds of mystics; prayātāḥ—one who goes;
yānti—departs; tam—that; kālam—time; vakṣyāmi—describing; bharatarṣabha—O best
of the Bhāratas.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Bhāratas, I shall now explain to you the different times at which,
passing away from this world, one does or does not come back.

**PURPORT**

The unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord who are totally surrendered souls do
not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. They leave everything
in Kṛṣṇa’s hands and so easily and happily return to Godhead. But those who are
not unalloyed devotees and who depend instead on such methods of spiritual
realization as karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, haṭha-yoga, etc., must leave the body at
a suitable time and thereby be assured whether or not they will return to the
world of birth and death.

If the yogī is perfect, he can select the time and place for leaving this
material world, but if he is not so perfect, then he has to leave at nature’s
will. The most suitable time to leave the body and not return is being explained
by the Lord in these verses. According to Ācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the
Sanskrit word kāla used herein refers to the presiding deity of time.

### 8.24


agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ

ṣaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇam

tatra prayātā gacchanti

brahma brahma-vido janāḥ

agniḥ—fire; jyotiḥ—light; ahaḥ—day; śuklaḥ—white; ṣaṭ-māsāḥ—six months;
uttarāyaṇam—when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra—there; prayātāḥ—one
who goes; gacchanti—passes away; brahma—the Absolute; brahma-vidaḥ—one who knows
the Absolute; janāḥ—person.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world during the influence
of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment, during the fortnight of
the moon and the six months when the sun travels in the north.

**PURPORT**

When fire, light, day and moon are mentioned, it is to be understood that over
all of them there are various presiding deities who make arrangements for the
passage of the soul. At the time of death, the jīva sets forth on the path to a
new life. If one leaves the body at the time designated above, either accidently
or by arrangement, it is possible for him to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti.
Mystics who are advanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to
leave the body. Others have no control—if by accident they leave at an
auspicious moment, then they will not return to the cycle of birth and death,
but if not, then there is every possibility that they will have to return.
However, for the pure devotee in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no fear of
returning, whether he leaves the body at an auspicious or inauspicious moment,
by accident or arrangement.

### 8.25


dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ

ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam

tatra cāndramasaṁ jyotir

yogī prāpya nivartate

dhūmaḥ—smoke; rātriḥ—night; tathā—also; kṛṣṇaḥ—the fortnight of the dark moon;
ṣaṭ-māsāḥ—the six months; dakṣiṇa-ayanam—when the sun passes on the southern
side; tatra—there; cāndramasam—the moon planet; jyotiḥ—light, yogī—the mystic;
prāpya—achieves; nivartate—comes back.

**TRANSLATION**

The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night, the
moonlight fortnight, or in the six months when the sun passes to the south, or
who reaches the moon planet, again comes back.

**PURPORT**

In the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we are informed that those who are
expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earth attain to the
moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon for about 10,000 years (by
demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinking soma-rasa. They eventually
return to earth. This means that on the moon there are higher classes of living
beings, though they may not be perceived by the gross senses.

### 8.26


śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete

jagataḥ śāśvate mate

ekayā yāty anāvṛttim

anyayāvartate punaḥ

śukla—light; kṛṣṇe—darkness; gatī—passing away; hi—certainly; ete—all these;
jagataḥ—of the material world; śāśvate—the Vedas; mate—in the opinion; ekayā—by
one; yāti—goes; anāvṛttim—no return; anyayā—by the other; āvartate—comes back;
punaḥ—again.

**TRANSLATION**

According to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world—one in
light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back; but
when one passes in darkness, he returns.

**PURPORT**

The same description of departure and return is quoted by Ācārya Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa from the Chandogya Upaniṣad. In such a way, those who are fruitive
laborers and philosophical speculators from time immemorial are constantly going
and coming. Actually they do not attain ultimate salvation, for they do not
surrender to Kṛṣṇa.

### 8.27


naite sṛtī pārtha jānan

yogī muhyati kaścana

tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu

yoga-yukto bhavārjuna

na—never; ete—all these; sṛtī—different paths; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; jānan—even
if they know; yogī—the devotees of the Lord; muhyati—bewildered; kaścana—anyone;
tasmāt—therefore; sarveṣu kāleṣu—always; yoga-yuktaḥ—being engaged in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness; bhava—just become; arjuna—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

The devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never bewildered. Therefore
be always fixed in devotion.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the different
paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. A devotee of the
Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will depart either by arrangement or by
accident. The devotee should be firmly established in Krṣṇa consciousness and
chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. He should know that concern over either of these two paths is
troublesome. The best way to be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to be always
dovetailed in His service, and this will make one’s path to the spiritual
kingdom safe, certain, and direct. The word yoga-yukta is especially significant
in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantly engaged in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in all his activities. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī advises that one should be
unattached in the material world and that all affairs should be steeped in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. In this way one attains perfection. Therefore the devotee is not
disturbed by these descriptions because he knows that his passage to the supreme
abode is guaranteed by devotional service.

### 8.28


vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva

dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam

atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā

yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam

vedeṣu—in the study of the Vedas; yajñeṣu—in the performances of yajña,
sacrifice; tapaḥsu—undergoing different types of austerities; ca—also;
eva—certainly; dāneṣu—in giving charities; yat—that which; puṇya-phalam—the
result of pious work; pradiṣṭam—directed; atyeti—surpasses; tat—all those;
sarvam idam—all those described above; viditvā—knowing; yogī—the devotee;
param—supreme; sthānam—abode; upaiti—achieved peace; ca—also; ādyam—original.

**TRANSLATION**

A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results
derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving charity
or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. At the end he reaches the
supreme abode.

**PURPORT**

This verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth Chapters, particularly as
the chapters deal with Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service. One has to
study the Vedas under the guidance of the spiritual master and undergo many
austerities and penances while living under his care. A brahmacārī has to live
in the home of the spiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms
from door to door and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only
under the master’s order, and if the master neglects to call the student for
food that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedic principles for
observing brahmacarya.

After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period from five to
twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Study of the Vedas is
not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators, but for the formation of
character. After this training, the brahmacārī is allowed to enter into
household life and marry. When he is a householder, he also has to perform many
sacrifices and strive for further enlightenment. Then after retiring from
household life, upon accepting the order of vānaprastha, he undergoes severe
penances, such as living in forests, dressing with tree bark, not shaving, etc.
By carrying out the orders of brahmacārī, householder, vānaprastha and finally
sannyāsa, one becomes elevated to the perfectional stage of life. Some are then
elevated to the heavenly kingdoms, and when they become even more advanced they
are liberated in the spiritual sky, either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in
the Vaikuṇṭha planets or Kṛṣṇaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic
literatures.

The beauty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, by engaging
in devotional service, one can surpass all rituals of the different orders of
life.

One should try to understand the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of the Gītā not by
scholarship or mental speculation, but by hearing them in association with pure
devotees. Chapters Six through Twelve are the essence of the Gītā. If one is
fortunate to understand the Gītā—especially these middle six chapters—in the
association of devotees, then his life at once becomes glorified beyond all
penances, sacrifices, charities, speculations, etc. One should hear the Gītā
from the devotee because at the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated
that the Gīta can only be perfectly understood by devotees. Hearing the Gītā
from devotees, not from mental speculators, is called faith. Through association
of devotees, one is placed in devotional service, and by this service Kṛṣṇa’s
activities, form, pastimes, name, etc., become clear, and all misgivings are
dispelled. Then once doubts are removed, the study of the Gītā becomes extremely
pleasurable, and one develops a taste and feeling for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In
the advanced stage, one falls completely in love with Kṛṣṇa, and that is the
beginning of the highest perfectional stage of life which prepares the devotee’s
transferral to Kṛṣṇa’s abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vṛndāvana, where the
devotee enters into eternal happiness.
