### 4.30


sarve ’py ete yajña-vido

yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ

yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo

yānti brahma sanātanam

sarve—all; api—although apparently different; ete—all these;
yajña-vidaḥ—conversant with the purpose of performing; yajña—sacrifices;
kṣapita—being cleansed of the result of such performances; kalmaṣāḥ—sinful
reactions; yajña-śiṣṭa—as a result of such performances of yajña;
amṛta-bhujaḥ—those who have tasted such nectar; yānti—do approach; brahma—the
supreme; sanātanam—eternal atmosphere.

**TRANSLATION**

All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of sinful
reaction, and, having tasted the nectar of the remnants of such sacrifice, they
go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.

**PURPORT**

From the foregoing explanation of differents types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one’s possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical doctrines,
and performance of the yoga system), it is found that the common aim of all is
to control the senses. Sense gratification is the root cause of material
existence; therefore, unless and until one is situated on a platform apart from
sense gratification, there is no chance of being elevated to the eternal
platform of full knowledge, full bliss and full life. This platform is in the
eternal atmosphere, or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices
help one to become cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By
this advancement in life, one not only becomes happy and opulent in this life,
but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God, either merging
into the impersonal Brahman or associating with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.

### 4.31


nāyaṁ loko ’sty ayajñasya

kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama

na—never; ayam—this; lokaḥ—planet; asti—there is; ayajñasya—of the foolish;
kutaḥ—where is; anyaḥ—the other; kuru-sattama—O best amongst the Kurus.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live happily on this
planet or in this life: what then of the next?

**PURPORT**

Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably ignorant of his
real situation. In other words, existence in the material world is due to the
multiple reactions to our sinful lives. Ignorance is the cause of sinful life,
and sinful life is the cause of one’s dragging on in material existence. The
human form of life is the only loophole by which one may get out of this
entanglement. The Vedas, therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing out
the paths of religion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and, at
last, the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path of
religion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above, automatically
solves our economic problems. By performance of yajña we can have enough food,
enough milk, etc.—even if there is a so-called increase of population. When the
body is fully supplied, naturally the next stage is to satisfy the senses. The
Vedas prescribe, therefore, sacred marriage for regulated sense gratification.
Thereby one is gradually elevated to the platform of release from material
bondage, and the highest perfection of liberated life is to associate with the
Supreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajña (sacrifice), as
described above. Now, if a person is not inclined to perform yajña according to
the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life? There are different grades of
material comforts in different heavenly planets, and in all cases there is
immense happiness for persons engaged in different kinds of yajña. But the
highest kind of happiness that a man can achieve is to be promoted to the
spiritual planets by practice of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A life of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is therefore the solution to all the problems of material
existence.

### 4.32


evaṁ bahu-vidhā yajñā

vitatā brahmaṇo mukhe

karma-jān viddhi tān sarvān

evaṁ jñātvā vimokṣyase

evam—thus; bahu-vidhāḥ—various kinds of; yajñāḥ—sacrifices; vitatāḥ—widespread;
brahmaṇaḥ—of the Vedas; mukhe—in the face of; karma-jān—born of work; viddhi—you
should know; tān—them; sarvān—all; evam—thus; jñātvā—knowing; vimokṣyase—be
liberated.

**TRANSLATION**

All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and all of
them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such, you will become
liberated.

**PURPORT**

Different types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the Vedas to
suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeply absorbed in the
bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged that one can work either with
the body, the mind, or the intelligence. But all of them are recommended for
ultimately bringing about liberation from the body. This is confirmed by the
Lord herewith from His own mouth.

### 4.33


śreyān dravya-mayād yajñāj

jñāna-yajñaḥ parantapa

sarvaṁ karmākhilaṁ pārtha

jñāne parisamāpyate

śreyān—greater; dravyamayāt—than the sacrifice of material possessions;
yajñāt—knowledge; jñāna-yajñaḥ—sacrifice in knowledge; parantapa—O chastiser of
the enemy; sarvam—all; karma—activities; akhilam—in totality; pārtha—O son of
Pṛthā; jñāne—in knowledge; parisamāpyate—ends in.

**TRANSLATION**

O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than the
sacrifice of material possessions. O son of Pṛthā, after all, the sacrifice of
work culminates in transcendental knowledge.

**PURPORT**

The purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete knowledge,
then to gain release from material miseries, and, ultimately, to engage in
loving transcendental service to the Supreme Lord (Kṛṣṇa consciousness).
Nonetheless, there is a mystery about all these different activities of
sacrifice, and one should know this mystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different
forms according to the particular faith of the performer. When one’s faith
reaches the stage of transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices
should be considered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice material
possessions without such knowledge, for without attainment of knowledge,
sacrifices remain on the material platform and bestow no spiritual benefit. Real
knowledge culminates in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the highest stage of transcendental
knowledge. Without the elevation of knowledge, sacrifices are simply material
activities. When, however, they are elevated to the level of transcendental
knowledge, all such activities enter onto the spiritual platform. Depending on
differences in consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes called
karma-kāṇḍa, fruitive activities, and sometimes jñāna-kāṇḍa, knowledge in the
pursuit of truth. It is better when the end is knowledge.

### 4.34


tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

tat—that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi—try to understand;
praṇipātena—by approaching a spiritual master; paripraśnena—by submissive
inquiries; sevayā—by the rendering of service; upadekṣyanti—initiate; te—unto
you; jñānam—knowledge; jñāninaḥ—the self-realized; tattva—truth; darśinaḥ—the
seers.

**TRANSLATION**

Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him
submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart
knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.

**PURPORT**

The path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord therefore
advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in the line of disciplic
succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be a bona fide spiritual master
without following this principle of disciplic succession. The Lord is the
original spiritual master, and a person in the disciplic succession can convey
the message of the Lord as it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually
realized by manufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolish
pretenders. The Bhāgavatam says: dharmaṁ hi sākṣād-bhagavat-praṇītam—the path of
religion is directly enunciated by the Lord. Therefore, mental speculation or
dry arguments cannot help one progress in spiritual life. One has to approach a
bona fide spiritual master to receive the knowledge. Such a spiritual master
should be accepted in full surrender, and one should serve the spiritual master
like a menial servant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realized
spiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life. Inquiries and
submission constitute the proper combination for spiritual understanding. Unless
there is submission and service, inquiries from the learned spiritual master
will not be effective. One must be able to pass the test of the spiritual
master, and when he sees the genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically
blesses the disciple with genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, both
blind following and absurd inquiries are condemned. One should not only hear
submissively from the spiritual master; but one must also get a clear
understanding from him, in submission and service and inquiries. A bona fide
spiritual master is by nature very kind toward the disciple. Therefore when the
student is submissive and is always ready to render service, the reciprocation
of knowledge and inquiries becomes perfect.

### 4.35


yaj jñātvā na punar moham

evaṁ yāsyasi pāṇḍava

yena bhūtāny aśeṣāṇi

drakṣyasy ātmany atho mayi

yat—which; jñātvā—knowing; na—never; punaḥ—again; moham—illusion; evam—like
this; yāsyasi—you shall go; pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; yena—by which; bhūtāni—all
living entities; aśesāṇi—totally; drakṣyasi—you will see; ātmani—in the Supreme
Soul; atho—or in other words; mayi—in Me.

**TRANSLATION**

And when you have thus learned the truth, you will know that all living beings
are but part of Me—and that they are in Me, and are Mine.

**PURPORT**

The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who knows
things as they are, is learning that all living beings are parts and parcels of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The sense of a separated
existence from Kṛṣṇa is called māyā (mā—not, yā—this). Some think that we have
nothing to do with Kṛṣṇa, that Kṛṣṇa is only a great historical personality and
that the Absolute is the impersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gītā, this impersonal Brahman is the personal effulgence of Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of everything. In the
Brahma-saṁhitā it is clearly stated that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions of incarnations are only His
different expansions. Similarly, the living entities are also expansions of
Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādī philosophers wrongly think that Kṛṣṇa loses His own separate
existence in His many expansions. This thought is material in nature. We have
experience in the material world that a thing, when fragmentally distributed,
loses its own original identity. But the Māyāvādī philosophers fail to
understand that Absolute means that one plus one is equal to one, and that one
minus one is also equal to one. This is the case in the absolute world.

For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are now covered
with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate from Kṛṣṇa. Although
we are separated parts of Kṛṣṇa, we are nevertheless not different from Him. The
bodily difference of the living entities is māyā, or not actual fact. We are all
meant to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. By māyā alone Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily
relationship with his kinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual
relationship with Kṛṣṇa. The whole teaching of the Gītā is targetted toward this
end: that a living being, as His eternal servitor, cannot be separated from
Kṛṣṇa, and his sense of being an identity apart from Kṛṣṇa is called māyā. The
living entities, as separate parts and parcels of the Supreme, have a purpose to
fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose, since time immemorial they are situated
in different bodies, as men, animals, demigods, etc. Such bodily differences
arise from forgetfulness of the transcendental service of the Lord. But when one
is engaged in transcendental service through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one becomes at
once liberated from this illusion. One can acquire such pure knowledge only from
the bona fide spiritual master and thereby avoid the delusion that the living
entity is equal to Kṛṣṇa. Perfect knowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Kṛṣṇa, is
the supreme shelter for all living entities, and giving up such shelter, the
living entities are deluded by the material energy, imagining themselves to have
a separate identity. Thus, under different standards of material identity, they
become forgetful of Kṛṣṇa. When, however, such deluded living entities become
situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is to be understood that they are on the
path of liberation, as confirmed in the Bhāgavatam: muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ
svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ. Liberation means to be situated in one’s constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of Kṛṣṇa (Kṛṣṇa consciousness).
