### 6.11-12


śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya

sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ

nāty-ucchritaṁ nāti-nīcaṁ

cailājina-kuśottaram

tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ

upaviśyāsane yuñjyād

yogam ātma-viśuddhaye

śucau—in sanctified; deśe—in the land; pratiṣṭhāpya—placing; sthiram—firm;
āsanam—seat; ātmanaḥ—self-dependant; na—not; ati—too; ucchritam—high; na—nor;
ati—too; nīcam—low; caila-ajna—soft cloth and deerskin; kuśottaram—kuśa grass;
tatra—thereupon; ekāgram—one attention; manaḥ—mind; kṛtvā—doing so;
yata-citta—controlling the mind; indriya—senses; kriyaḥ—activities;
upaviśya—sitting on; āsane—on the seat; yuñjyāt—execute; yogam—yoga practice;
ātma—heart; viśuddhaye—for clarifying.

**TRANSLATION**

To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kuśa-grass on
the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat should
neither be too high nor too low and should be situated in a sacred place. The
yogī should then sit on it very firmly and should practice yoga by controlling
the mind and the senses, purifying the heart and fixing the mind on one point.

**PURPORT**

“Sacred place” refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogīs, the
transcendentalists or the devotees all leave home and reside in sacred places
such as Prayāg, Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, Hṛṣīkeśa, and Hardwar and in solitude
practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamunā and the Ganges flow. But
often this is not possible, especially for Westerners. The so-called yoga
societies in big cities may be successful in earning material benefit, but they
are not at all suitable for the actual practice of yoga. One who is not
self-controlled and whose mind is not undisturbed cannot practice meditation.
Therefore, in the Bṛhan-Nāradīya Purāṇa it is said that in the Kali-yuga (the
present yuga or age) when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritual
realization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best means of
spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva
gatir anyathā.

“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting
the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There
is no other way.”

### 6.13-14


samaṁ kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ

dhārayann acalaṁ sthiraḥ

samprekṣya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ

diśaś cānavalokayan

praśāntātmā vigata-bhīr

brahmacāri-vrate sthitaḥ

manaḥ saṁyamya mac-citto

yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

samam—straight; kāya-śiraḥ—body and head; grīvam—neck; dhārayan—holding;
acalam—unmoved; sthiraḥ—still; samprekṣya—looking; nāsikā—nose; agram—tip;
svam—own; diśaḥ—all sides; ca—also; anavalokayan—not seeing;
praśānta—unagitated; ātmā—mind; vigata-bhīḥ—devoid of fear; brahmacāri-vrate—in
the vow of celibacy; sthitaḥ—situated; manaḥ—mind; saṁyamya—completely subdued;
mat—unto Me (Kṛṣṇa); cittaḥ—concentrated; yuktaḥ—actual yogī; āsīta—being so;
mat—unto Me; paraḥ—ultimate goal.

**TRANSLATION**

One should hold one’s body, neck and head erect in a straight line and stare
steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus with an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid
of fear, completely free from sex life, one should meditate upon Me within the
heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.

**PURPORT**

The goal of life is to know Kṛṣṇa, who is situated within the heart of every
living being as Paramātmā, the four-handed Viṣṇu form. The yoga process is
practiced in order to discover and see this localized form of Viṣṇu, and not for
any other purpose. The localized Viṣṇu-mūrti is the plenary representation of
Kṛṣṇa dwelling within one’s heart. One who has no program to realize this
Viṣṇu-murti is uselessly engaged in mock-yoga practice and is certainly wasting
his time. Kṛṣṇā is the ultimate goal of life, and the Viṣṇu-murti situated in
one’s heart is the object of yoga practice. To realize this Viṣṇu-murti within
the heart, one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; therefore one
has to leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remaining seated as
mentioned above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home or elsewhere and attend
a so-called yoga class and thus become a yogī. One has to practice controlling
the mind and avoiding all kinds of sense gratification, of which sex life is the
chief. In the rules of celibacy written by the great sage Yājñavalkya it is
said:

karmaṇā manasā vācā sarvāvasthāsu sarvadā sarvatra maithuṇa-tyāgo brahmacaryaṁ
pracakṣate.

“The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from sex
indulgence in work, words and mind—at all times, under all circumstances, and in
all places.” No one can perform correct yoga practice through sex indulgence.
Brahmacarya is taught, therefore, from childhood when one has no knowledge of
sex life. Children at the age of five are sent to the guru-kula, or the place of
the spiritual master, and the master trains the young boys in the strict
discipline of becoming brahmacārīs. Without such practice, no one can make
advancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyāna, jñāna or bhakti. One who,
however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, having sexual
relationship only with his wife (and that also under regulation), is also called
brahmacārī. Such a restrained householder brahmacārī may be accepted in the
bhakti school, but the jñāna and dhyāna schools do not admit even householder
brahmacārīs. They require complete abstinence without compromise. In the bhakti
school, a householder brahmacārī is allowed controlled sex life because the cult
of bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexual attraction,
being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is
said:

viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ rasa-varjaṁ raso ’py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā
nivartate

Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense gratification, a
devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of superior taste. Other than
the devotee, no one has any information of that superior taste.

Vigatabhīḥ. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A
conditioned soul is fearful due to his perverted memory, his forgetfulness of
his eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. The Bhāgavatam says, bhayaṁ
dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ: Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
the only basis for fearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is possible for a
person who is Kṛṣṇa conscious. And since the ultimate goal of yoga practice is
to see the Lord within, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person is already the best of all
yogīs. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein are different from
those of the popular so-called yoga societies.

### 6.15


yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ

yogī niyata-mānasaḥ

śāntiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ

mat-saṁsthām adhigacchati

yuñjan—practicing like this; evam—as mentioned above; sadā—constantly;
ātmānam—body, mind and soul; yogī—the mystic transcendentalist;
niyata-mānasaḥ—regulated mind; śāntim—peace; nirvāṇa-paramām—cessation of
material existence; mat-saṁsthām—in the spiritual sky (the kingdom of God);
adhigacchati—does attain.

**TRANSLATION**

Thus practicing control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Kṛṣṇa] by
cessation of material existence.

**PURPORT**

The ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga practice is
not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it is to enable the
cessation of all material existence. One who seeks an improvement in health or
aspires after material perfection is no yogī according to Bhagavad-gītā. Nor
does cessation of material existence entail one’s entering into “the void,”
which is only a myth. There is no void anywhere within the creation of the Lord.
Rather, the cessation of material existence enables one to enter into the
spiritual sky, the abode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly
described in the Bhagavad-gītā as that place where there is no need of sun,
moon, nor electricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are
self-illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God is
everywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are called paraṁ
dhāma, or superior abodes.

A consummate yogī, who is perfect in understanding Lord Kṛṣṇa, as is clearly
stated herein (mat-cittaḥ, mat-paraḥ, mat-sthānam) by the Lord Himself, can
attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supreme abode, the Kṛṣṇa-loka
known as Goloka Vṛndāvana. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is clearly stated (goloka
eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ) that the Lord, although residing always in His
abode called Goloka, is the all-pervading Brahman and the localized Paramātmā as
well by dint of His superior spiritual energies. No one can reach the spiritual
sky or enter into the eternal abode (Vaikuṇṭha Goloka Vṛndāvana) of the Lord
without the proper understanding of Kṛṣṇa and His plenary expansion Viṣṇu.
Therefore a person working in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the perfect yogī, because
his mind is always absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s activities. Sa vai manaḥ
kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. In the Vedas also we learn: tam eva viditvātimṛtyum eti:
“One can overcome the path of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.” In other words, perfection of the yoga system is
the attainment of freedom from material existence and not some magical jugglery
or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.


### 6.16


nāty-aśnatas ’tu yogo ’sti

na caikāntam anaśnataḥ

na cāti-svapna-śīlasya

jāgrato naiva cārjuna

na—never; ati—too much; aśnataḥ—of one who eats so; tu—but; yogaḥ—linking with
the Supreme; asti—there is; na—nor; ca—also; ekāntam—very low;
anaśnataḥ—abstaining from eating; na—nor; ca—also; ati—too much;
svapna-śīlasya—of one who sleeps too much; jāgrataḥ—or one who keeps night watch
too much; na—not; eva—ever; ca—and; arjuna—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

There is no possibility of one’s becoming a yogī, O Arjuna, if one eats too
much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.

**PURPORT**

Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogīs. Too much
eating means eating more than is required to keep the body and soul together.
There is no need for men to eat animals because there is an ample supply of
grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simple foodstuff is considered to be
in the mode of goodness according to the Bhagavad-gītā. Animal food is for those
in the mode of ignorance. Therefore, those who indulge in animal food, drinking,
smoking and eating food which is not first offered to Kṛṣṇa will suffer sinful
reactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ papa ye
pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, or cooks for himself,
not offering his food to Kṛṣṇa, eats only sin. One who eats sin and eats more
than is allotted to him cannot execute perfect yoga. It is best that one eat
only the remnants of foodstuff offered to Kṛṣṇa. A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
does not eat anything which is not first offered to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, only the
Kṛṣṇa conscious person can attain perfection in yoga practice. Nor can one who
artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his own personal process of
fasting, practice yoga. The Kṛṣṇa conscious person observes fasting as it is
recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eat more than is required,
and he is thus competent to perform yoga practice. One who eats more than
required will dream very much while sleeping, and he must consequently sleep
more than is required. One should not sleep more than six hours daily. One who
sleeps more than six hours out of twenty-four is certainly influenced by the
mode of ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is lazy and prone to sleep
a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.

### 6.17


yuktāhāra-vihārasya

yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

yukta-svapnāvabodhasya

yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

yukta—regulated; āhāra—eating; vihārasya—recreation; yukta—regulated;
ceṣṭasya—of one who works for maintenance; karmasu—in discharging duties;
yukta—regulated; svapna-avabodhasya—regulated sleep and wakefulness;
yogaḥ—practice of yoga; bhavati—becomes; duḥkha-hā—diminishing pains.

**TRANSLATION**

He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and recreation
can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system.

**PURPORT**

Extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating—which are
demands of the body—can block advancement in the practice of yoga. As far as
eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when one is practiced to take and
accept prasādam, sanctified food. Lord Kṛṣṇa is offered, according to the
Bhagavad-gītā (### . 9.26), vegetables, flowers, fruits, grains, milk, etc. In
this way, a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness becomes automatically trained not to
accept food not meant for human consumption, or which is not in the category of
goodness. As far as sleeping is concerned, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person is always
alert in the discharge of his duties in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and therefore any
unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss. A Kṛṣṇa conscious
person cannot bear to pass a minute of his life without being engaged in the
service of the Lord. Therefore, his sleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in
this respect is Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was always engaged in the service of
Kṛṣṇa and who could not sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not even
that. Ṭhākura Haridāsa would not even accept prasādam nor even sleep for a
moment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beads three
hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person
does not do anything which is not connected with Kṛṣṇa’s interest, and thus his
work is always regulated and is untainted by sense gratification. Since there is
no question of sense gratification, there is no material leisure for a person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work, speech, sleep,
wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is no material misery for
him.
