### 18.10


na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma

kuśale nānuṣajjate

tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo

medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ

na—never; dveṣṭi—hates; akuśalam—inauspicious; karma—work; kuśale—in auspicious;
na—nor; anuṣajjate—becomes attached; tyāgī—the renouncer; sattva—goodness;
samāviṣṭaḥ—absorbed in; medhāvī—intelligent; chinna—cut up; saṁśayaḥ—all doubts.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate inauspicious
work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubts about work.

**PURPORT**

It is said in Bhagavad-gītā that one can never give up work at any time.
Therefore he who works for Kṛṣṇa and does not enjoy the fruitive results, who
offers everything to Kṛṣṇa, is actually a renouncer. There are many members of
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who work very hard in their
office or in the factory or some other place, and whatever they earn they give
to the Society. Such highly elevated souls are actually sannyāsīs and are
situated in the renounced order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to
renounce the fruits of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.

### 18.11


na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ

tyaktuṁ karmāṇy aśeṣataḥ

yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī

sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate

na—never; hi—certainly; deha-bhṛtā—of the embodied; śakyam—possible; tyaktum—to
renounce; karmāṇi—activities of; aśeṣataḥ—altogether; yaḥ tu—anyone who;
karma—work; phala—result; tyāgī—renouncer; saḥ—he; tyāgī—the renouncer;
iti—thus; abhidhīyate—it is said.

**TRANSLATION**

It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities.
Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits of action is one who has
truly renounced.

**PURPORT**

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship with
Kṛṣṇa is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or suffer the
results of his acts after death.

### 18.12


aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca

tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam

bhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya

na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit

aniṣṭam—leading to hell; iṣṭam—leading to heaven; miśram ca—or mixture;
tri-vidham—three kinds; karmaṇaḥ—work; phalam—result; bhavati—becomes;
atyāginām—of the renouncer; pretya—after death; na tu—but not; sannyāsinām—of
the renounced order; kvacit—at any time.

**TRANSLATION**

For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action—desirable,
undesirable and mixed—accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced
order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.

**PURPORT**

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate anyone
or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place and at the
proper time without fearing the troublesome effects of his duty. Such a person
situated in transcendence should be understood to be most intelligent and beyond
all doubts in his activities.

### 18.13-14


pañcaitāni mahā-bāho

kāraṇāni nibodha me

sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni

siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām

adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā

karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham

vividhāś ca pṛthak ceṣṭā

daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam

pañca—five; etāni—all these; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; kāraṇāni—cause;
nibodha—just understand; me—from Me; sāṅkhye—in the Vedas; kṛtānte—after
performance; proktāni—said; siddhaye—perfection; sarva—all; karmaṇām—actuated;
adhiṣṭhānam—place; tathā—also; kartā—worker; karaṇam ca—and instruments;
pṛthak-vidham—different kinds; vividhāḥ ca—varieties; pṛthak—separately;
ceṣṭāḥ—endeavor; daivam—the Supreme; ca—also; eva—certainly; atra—here;
pañcamam—five.

**TRANSLATION**

O mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring about the
accomplishment of all action. These are declared in sāṅkhya philosophy to be the
place of action, the performer, the senses, the endeavor, and ultimately the
Supersoul.

**PURPORT**

A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have some
reaction, how is it that the person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness does not suffer or
enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedānta philosophy to show how
this is possible. He says that there are five causes for all activities and for
success in all activity, and one should know these five causes. Sāṅkhya means
the stalk of knowledge, and Vedānta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by
all leading ācāryas. Even Śaṅkara accepts Vedānta-sūtra as such. Therefore such
authority should be consulted.

The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in the Gītā,
“sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi.” He is engaging everyone in certain activities. Acts done
under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in this life or in the
life after death.

The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul acts in various
ways, and for each and every action there is a different endeavor. But all one’s
activities depend on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the heart
as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the super cause. Under these circumstances, he
who is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul
situated within the heart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in
complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything is dependant on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

### 18.15


śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat

karma prārabhate naraḥ

nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā

pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ

śarīra—body; vāk—speech; manobhiḥ—by the mind; yat—anything; karma—work;
prārabhate—begins; naraḥ—a person; nyāyyam—right; vā—or; viparītam—the opposite;
vā—or; pañca—five; ete—all these; tasya—its; hetavaḥ—causes.

**TRANSLATION**

Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is caused
by these five factors.

**PURPORT**

The words “right” and “wrong” are very significant in this verse. Right work is
work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and wrong
work is work done against the principles of the scriptural injunctions. But
whatever is done requires these five factors for its complete performance.

### 18.16


tatraivaṁ sati kartāram

ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ

paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān

na sa paśyati durmatiḥ

tatra—there; evam—certainly; sati—being thus; kartāram—of the worker;
ātmānam—the soul; kevalam—only; tu—but; yaḥ—anyone; paśyati—sees;
akṛta-buddhitvāt—due to unintelligence; na—never; saḥ—he; paśyati—sees;
durmatiḥ—foolish.

**TRANSLATION**

Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five
factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

**PURPORT**

A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend
within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes are the place,
the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause is the Supreme, the
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see not only the four material
causes, but the supreme efficient cause as well. One who does not see the
Supreme thinks himself to be the instrument.

### 18.17


yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo

buddhir yasya na lipyate

hatvāpi sa imāl̐ lokān

na hanti na nibadhyate

yasya—of one who; na—never; ahaṅkṛtaḥ—false ego; bhāvaḥ—nature;
buddhiḥ—intelligence; yasya—one who; na—never; lipyate—is attached; hatvā
api—even killing; saḥ—he; imān—this; lokān—world; na—never; hanti—kills;
na—never; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.

**TRANSLATION**

One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,
though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is he bound by his
actions.

**PURPORT**

In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight arises from
false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not
consider the Supreme sanction within and without. If one does not know that a
super sanction is there, why should he act? But one who knows the instrument of
work, himself as the worker, and the Supreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner, is
perfect in doing everything. Such a person is never in illusion. Personal
activity and responsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the
direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though
killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with the reaction of such
killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a superior officer, he is not
subject to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account, then
he is certainly judged by a court of law.

### 18.18


jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā

tri-vidhā karma-codanā

karaṇaṁ karma karteti

tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ

jñānam—knowledge; jñeyam—objective; parijñātā—the knower; tri-vidhā—three kinds;
karma—work; codanā—impetus; karaṇam—the senses; karma—work; kartā—the doer;
iti—thus; tri-vidhaḥ—three kinds; karma—work; saṅgrahaḥ—accumulation.

**TRANSLATION**

Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors which
motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise the threefold basis
of action.

**PURPORT**

There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object of
knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself and the
worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by any human being has
these elements. Before one acts, there is some impetus, which is called
inspiration. Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle form
of work. Then work takes the form of action. First one has to undergo the
psychological processes of thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called
impetus. Actually the faith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration
to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of
the spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is there,
then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. The mind is the
center of all senses, and the object is work itself. These are the different
phases of work as described in Bhagavad-gītā. The sum total of all activities is
called accumulation of work.
