### 18.56


sarva-karmāṇy api sadā

kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ

mat-prasādād avāpnoti

śāśvataṁ padam avyayam

sarva—all; karmāṇi—activities; api—although; sadā—always; kurvāṇaḥ—performing;
mat—under My; vyapāśrayah—protection; mat—My; prasādāt—mercy; avāpnoti—achieves;
sāśvatam—eternal; padam—abode; avyayam—-imperishable.

**TRANSLATION**

Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My protection,
reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

**PURPORT**

The word mad-vyapāśrayaḥ means under the protection of the Supreme Lord. To be
free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under the direction of the
Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual master. There is no time
limitation for a pure devotee. He is always, twenty-four hours, one hundred
percent engaged in activities under the direction of the Supreme Lord. To a
devotee who is thus engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness the Lord is very, very kind.
In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental
abode, or Kṛṣṇaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about
it. In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal,
imperishable and full of knowledge.

### 18.57


cetasā sarva-karmāṇi

mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ

buddhi-yogam upāśritya

mac-cittaḥ satataṁ bhava

cetasā—by intelligence; sarva-karmāni—all kinds of activities; mayi—unto Me;
sannyasya—giving up; mat-paraḥ—My protection; buddhi-yogam—devotional
activities; upāśritya—taking shelter of; mat-cittaḥ—consciousness;
satatam—twenty-four hours a day; bhava—just become.

**TRANSLATION**

In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection. In
such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

**PURPORT**

When one acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he does not act as the master of the
world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under the direction of the
Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual independence. He acts only on the
order of the master. A servant acting on behalf of the supreme master has no
affection for profit and loss. He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms
of the order of the Lord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the
personal direction of Kṛṣṇa, but, when Kṛṣṇa is not present, how should one act?
If one acts according to the direction of Kṛṣṇa in this book, as well as under
the guidance of the representative of Kṛṣṇa, then the result will be the same.
The Sanskrit word mat-paraḥ is very important in this verse. It indicates that
one has no goal in life save and except acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness just to
satisfy Kṛṣṇa. And, while working in that way, one should think of Kṛṣṇa only:
“I have been appointed to discharge this particular duty by Kṛṣṇa.” While acting
in such a way, one naturally has to think of Kṛṣṇa. This is perfect Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. One should, however, note that, after doing something
whimsically, he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. That sort of
duty is not in the devotional service of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should act
according to the order of Krṣna. This is a very important point. That order of
Kṛṣṇa comes through disciplic succession from the bona fide spiritual master.
Therefore the spiritual master’s order should be taken as the prime duty of
life. If one gets a bona fide spiritual master and acts according to his
direction, then his perfection of life in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is guaranteed.

### 18.58


mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi

mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi

atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān

na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi

mat—My; cittaḥ—consciousness; sarva—all; durgāṇi—impediments; mat—My;
prasādāt—My mercy; tariṣyasi—you will overcome; atha—therefore; cet—if;
tvam—you; ahaṅkārāt—by false ego; na—not; śroṣyasi—do not hear; vinaṅkṣyasi—then
lose yourself.

**TRANSLATION**

If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness
but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

**PURPORT**

A person in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute the duties
of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom from all
anxiety. For one who acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Lord Kṛṣṇa becomes the most
intimate friend. He always looks after His friend’s comfort, and He gives
Himself to His friend, who is so devotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a
day to please the Lord. Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false
ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself
independant of the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under
strict material laws. But, as soon as he acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is
liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very carefully
that one who is not active in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is losing himself in the
material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No conditioned soul
actually knows what is to be done and what is not to be done, but a person who
acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is free to act because everything is prompted by
Kṛṣṇa from within and confirmed by the spiritual master.

### 18.59


yad ahaṅkāram āśritya

na yotsya iti manyase

mithyaiṣa vyavasāyas te

prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati

yat—therefore; ahaṅkāram—false ego; āśritya—taking shelter; na—not; yotsya—shall
fight; iti—thus; manyase—think; mithyā eṣaḥ—this is all false; vyavasāyah
te—your determination; prakṛtiḥ—material nature; tvām—you; niyokṣyati—will
engage you.

**TRANSLATION**

If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be
falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the kṣatriya. Therefore his
natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he was fearing that by killing
his teacher, grandfather and friends, there would be sinful reactions. Actually
he was considering himself master of his actions, as if he were directing the
good and bad results of such work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was present there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness
of the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as to what is
good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to attain
the perfection of life. No one can ascertain his destiny as the Supreme Lord
can; therefore the best course is to take direction from the Supreme Lord and
act. No one should neglect the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or
the order of the spiritual master who is the representative of God. One should
act unhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—that will keep him safe under all circumstances.

### 18.60


svabhāva-jena kaunteya

nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā

kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt

kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat

sva-bhāva-jena—by one’s own nature; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
nibaddhaḥ—conditioned; svena—by one’s own; karmaṇā—activities; kartum—to do;
na—not; icchasi—like; yat—that; mohāt—by illusion; kariṣyasi—you will act;
avaśaḥ—imperceptibly; api—even; tat—that.

**TRANSLATION**

Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But,
compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kuntī.

**PURPORT**

If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he is
compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is under the
spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and is acting in that
way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under the direction of the
Supreme Lord becomes glorious.

### 18.61


īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

īśvaraḥ—the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhūtānām—of all living entities; hṛd-deśe—in the
location of the heart; arjuna—O Arjuna; tiṣṭhati—resides; bhrāmayan—causing to
travel; sarva-bhūtāni—all living entities; yantra—machine; ārūḍhāni—being so
placed; māyayā—under the spell of material energy.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the
wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the
material energy.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to fight was
confined to his limited discretion. Lord Kṛṣṇa instructed that the individual is
not all in all. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, or He Himself, Kṛṣṇa, the
localized Supersoul, sits in the heart directing the living being. After
changing bodies, the living entity forgets his past deeds, but the Supersoul, as
the knower of the past, present and future, remains the witness of all his
activities. Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by this
Supersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried by the
material body which is created in the material energy under the direction of the
Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a particular type of body, he
has to work under the spell of that bodily situation. A person seated in a
high-speed motor car goes faster than one seated in a slower car, though the
living entities, the drivers, may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the
Supreme Soul, material nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular
type of living entity to work according to his past desires. The living entity
is not independant. One should not think himself independant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His control. Therefore
his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction of the next verse.

### 18.62


tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha

sarva-bhāvena bhārata

tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ

sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam

tam—unto Him; eva—certainly; śaraṇam—surrender; gaccha—go; sarva-bhāvena—in all
respects; bhārata—O son of Bharata; tat-prasādāt—by His grace;
parām—transcendental; śāntim—peace; sthānam—abode; prāpsyasi—you will get;
śāśvatam—eternal.

**TRANSLATION**

O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain
transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

**PURPORT**

A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who is situated in everyone’s heart, and that will relieve him from all
kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such surrender, one will not
only be released from all miseries in this life, but at the end he will reach
the Supreme God. The transcendental world is described in the Vedic literature
as tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,
everything material is actually spiritual, but paramaṁ padam specifically refers
to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual sky or Vaikuṇṭha.

In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā it is stated: “Sarvasya cāham hṛdi
sanniviṣṭaḥ.” The Lord is seated in everyone’s heart, so this recommendation
that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting within means that one
should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has
already been accepted by Arjuna as the Supreme. He was accepted in the Tenth
Chapter as paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma. Arjuna has accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the supreme abode of all living entities, not only
because of his personal experience but also because of the evidences of great
authorities like Nārada, Asita, Devala and Vyāsa.
