### 18.63


iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ

guhyād guhyataraṁ mayā

vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa

yathecchasi tathā kuru

iti—thus; te—unto you; jñānam—knowledge; ākhyātam—described;
guhyāt—confidential; guhyataram—still more confidential; mayā—by Me; vimṛśya—by
deliberation; etat—that; aśeṣeṇa—fully; yathā—as you; icchasi—you like;
tathā—that; kuru—perform.

**TRANSLATION**

Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge. Deliberate
on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

**PURPORT**

The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahmabhūta. One who
is in the brahma-bhūta condition is joyful; he never laments, nor does he desire
anything. That is due to confidential knowledge. Kṛṣṇa also discloses knowledge
of the Supersoul. This is also Brahman knowledge, knowledge of Brahman, but it
is superior.

Here Lord Kṛṣṇa telIs Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does not
interfere with the little independence of the living entity. In Bhagavad-gītā,
the Lord has explained in all respects how one can elevate his living condition.
The best advice imparted to Arjuna is to surrender unto the Supersoul seated
within his heart. By right discrimination, one should agree to act according to
the order of the Supersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna is
being directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight. Surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interest of the living entities.
It is not for the interest of the Supreme. Before surrendering, one is free to
deliberate on this subject as far as the intelligence goes; that is the best way
to accept the instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such
instruction comes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide
representative of Kṛṣṇa.


### 18.64


sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti

tato vakṣyāmi te hitam

sarva-guhyatamam—the most confidential; bhūyaḥ—again; śṛṇu—just hear; me—from
Me; paramam—the supreme; vacaḥ—instruction; isṭaḥ asi—you are very dear to Me;
dṛḍham—very; iti—thus; tataḥ—therefore; vakṣyāmi—speaking; te—for your;
hitam—benefit.

**TRANSLATION**

Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you the most confidential
part of knowledge. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.

**PURPORT**

The Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul within
everyone’s heart, and now He is giving the most confidential part of this
knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the end of
the Ninth Chapter He has said, “Just always think of Me.” The same instruction
is repeated here to stress the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā. This
essence is not understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear
to Kṛṣṇa, a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. This is the most important instruction in all
Vedic literature. What Kṛṣṇa is saying in this connection is the most essential
part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not only by Arjuna but by all
living entities.

### 18.65


man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo ’si me

man-manāḥ—thinking of Me; bhava—just become; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; mat-yājī—My
worshiper; mām—unto Me; namaskuru—offer your obeisances; mām—unto Me;
eva—certainly; eṣyasi—come; satyam—truly; te—to you; pratijāne—I promise;
prijaḥ—dear; asi—you are; me—My.

**TRANSLATION**

Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your homage unto
Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My
very dear friend.

**PURPORT**

The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a pure devotee
of Kṛṣṇa and always think of Him and act for Him. One should not become an
official meditator. Life should be so molded that one will always have the
chance to think of Kṛṣṇa. One should always act in such a way that all his daily
activities are in connection with Kṛṣṇa. He should arrange his life in such a
way that throughout the twenty-four hours he cannot but think of Kṛṣṇa. And the
Lord’s promise is that anyone who is in such pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness will
certainly return to the abode of Kṛṣṇa, where he will be engaged in the
association of Kṛṣṇa face to face. This most confidential part of knowledge is
spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone who follows
the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to Kṛṣṇa and obtain the same
perfection as Arjuna.

These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Kṛṣṇa—the very form
with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a beautiful face and
peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions of Kṛṣṇa found in the
Brahma-saṁhitā and other literatures. One should fix his mind on this original
form of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. He should not even divert his attention to other forms
of the Lord. The Lord has multi-forms, as Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, Rāma, Varāha, etc.,
but a devotee should concentrate his mind on the form that was present before
Arjuna. Concentration of the mind on the form of Kṛṣṇa constitutes the most
confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna because Arjuna
is the most dear friend of Kṛṣṇa’s.

### 18.66


sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

sarva-dharmān—all varieties of religion; parityajya—abandoning; mām—unto Me;
ekam—only; śaraṇam—surrender; vraja—go; aham—I; tvām—you; sarva—all;
pāpebhyaḥ—from sinful reactions; mokṣayiṣyāmi—deliver; mā—not; śucaḥ—worry.

**TRANSLATION**

Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.

**PURPORT**

The Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of religion,
knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul, knowledge of the
different types of orders and statuses of social life, knowledge of the
renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment, sense and mind control,
meditation, etc. He has described in so many ways different types of religion.
Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gītā, the Lord says that Arjuna should give up all
the processes that have been explained to him; he should simply surrender to
Kṛṣṇa. That surrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for the
Lord personally promises to protect him.

In the Eighth Chapter it was said that only one who has become free from all
sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Thus one may think that
unless he is free from all sinful reactions he cannot take to the surrendering
process. To such doubts it is here said that even if one is not free from all
sinful reactions, simply by the process of surrendering to Śrī Kṛṣṇa he is
automatically freed. There is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from
sinful reactions. One should unhesitatingly accept Kṛṣṇa as the supreme savior
of all living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.

According to the devotional process, one should simply accept such religious
principles that will lead ultimately to the devotional service of the Lord. One
may perform a particular occupational duty according to his position in the
social order, but if by executing his duty one does not come to the point of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all his activities are in vain.

Anything that does not lead to the perfectional stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness
should be avoided. One should be confident that in all circumstances Kṛṣṇa will
protect him from all difficulties. There is no need of thinking how one should
keep the body and soul together. Kṛṣṇa will see to that. One should always think
himself helpless and should consider Kṛṣṇa the only basis for his progress in
life. As soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service to the Lord
in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, at once he becomes freed from all contamination of
material nature. There are different processes of religion and purificatory
processes by cultivation of knowledge, meditation in the mystic yoga system,
etc., but one who surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa does not have to execute so many
methods. That simple surrender unto Kṛṣṇa will save him from unnecessarily
wasting time. One can thus make all progress at once and be freed from all
sinful reaction.

One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Kṛṣṇa. His name is Kṛṣṇa
because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by the beautiful,
all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Kṛṣṇa is fortunate. There are different kinds
of transcendentalists—some of them are attached to the impersonal Brahman
vision, some of them are attracted by the Supersoul feature, etc., but one who
is attracted to the personal feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and,
above all, one who is attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Kṛṣṇa
Himself, is the most perfect transcendentalist. In other words, devotional
service to Kṛṣṇa, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part of
knowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gītā. Karma-yogīs,
empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all called transcendentalists,
but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all. The particular words used
here, mā śucaḥ, “Don’t fear, don’t hesitate, don’t worry,” are very significant.
One may be perplexed as to how one can give up all kinds of religious forms and
simply surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, but such worry is useless.

### 18.67


idaṁ te nātapaskāya

nābhaktāya kadācana

na  cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ

na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati

idam—this; te—you; na—never; atapaskāya—one who is not austere; na—never;
abhaktāya—one who is not a devotee; kadācana—at any time; na—never; ca—also;
aśuśrūṣave—one who is not engaged in devotional service; vācyam—to be spoken;
na—never; ca—also; mām—unto Me; yaḥ—anyone; abhyasūyati—envious.

**TRANSLATION**

This confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not austere,
or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious of Me.

**PURPORT**

Persons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious process, who
have never attempted devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who have not
tended a pure devotee, and especially those who are conscious of Kṛṣṇa as a
historical personality or who are envious of the greatness of Kṛṣṇa, should not
be told this most confidential part of knowledge. It is, however, sometimes
found that even demoniac persons who are envious of Kṛṣṇa, worshiping Kṛṣṇa in a
different way, take to the profession of explaining Bhagavad-gītā in a different
way to make business, but anyone who desires actually to understand Kṛṣṇa must
avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā. Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gītā
is not understandable to those who are sensuous—even if one is not sensuous but
is strictly following the disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is
not a devotee, he also cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Even when one poses himself as a
devotee of Kṛṣṇa, but is not engaged in Kṛṣṇa conscious activities, he also
cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. There are many persons who envy Kṛṣṇa because He has
explained in Bhagavad-gītā that He is the Supreme and that nothing is above Him
or equal to Him. There are many persons who are envious of Kṛṣṇa. Such persons
should not be told of Bhagavad-gītā, for they cannot understand. There is no
possibility of faithless persons’ understanding Bhagavad-gītā and Kṛṣṇa. Without
understanding Kṛṣṇa from the authority of a pure devotee, one should not try to
comment upon Bhagavad-gitā.

### 18.68


ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ

yaḥ—anyone; idam—this; paramam—most; guhyam—confidential; mat—Mine;
bhakteṣu—amongst devotees of; abhidhāsyati—explains; bhaktim—devotional service;
mayi—unto Me; parām—transcendental; kṛtvā—having done; mām—unto Me;
eva—certainly; eṣyati—comes; asaṁśayaḥ—without doubt.

**TRANSLATION**

For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is
guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

**PURPORT**

Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gītā be discussed amongst the devotees
only, for those who are not devotees will neither understand Kṛṣṇa nor
Bhagavad-gītā. Those who do not accept Kṛṣṇa as He is and Bhagavad-gītā as it is
should not try to explain Bhagavad-gītā whimsically and become offenders.
Bhagavad-gītā should be explained to persons who are ready to accept Kṛṣṇa as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only
and not for philosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely to
present Bhagavad-gītā as it is will advance in devotional activities and reach
the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure devotion, he is sure
to go back home, back to Godhead.

### 18.69


na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

bhavitā na ca me tasmād

anyaḥ priyataro bhuvi

na—never; ca—and; tasmāt—therefore; manuṣyeṣu—among mankind; kaścit—anyone;
me—My; priya-kṛttamaḥ—more dear; bhavitā—will become; na—no; ca—and; me—My;
tasmāt—than him; anyaḥ—other; priyataraḥ—dearer; bhuvi—in this world.

**TRANSLATION**

There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever
be one more dear.
