### 14.19


nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ

yadā draṣṭānupaśyati

guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ vetti

mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigacchati

na—never; anyam—other than; guṇebhyaḥ—from the qualities; kartāram—the
performer; yadā—when; draṣṭā anupaśyati—he who sees properly; guṇebhyaḥ ca—from
the modes of nature; param—transcendental; vetti—know; mat-bhāvam—My spiritual
nature; saḥ—he; adhigacchati—is promoted.

**TRANSLATION**

When you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all these modes, then
you can know My spiritual nature.

**PURPORT**

One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature simply by
understanding them properly by learning from the proper souls. The real
spiritual master is Kṛṣṇa, and He is imparting this spiritual knowledge to
Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who are fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness that
one has to learn this science of activities in terms of the modes of nature.
Otherwise, one’s life will be misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide
spiritual master, a living entity can know of his spiritual position, his
material body, his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of
the material modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of these modes,
but when he can see his real position, then he can attain to the transcendental
platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually, the living entity is
not the performer of different activities. He is forced to act because he is
situated in a particular type of body, conducted by some particular mode of
material nature. Unless one has the help of spiritual authority, he cannot
understand in what position he is actually situated. With the association of a
bona fide spiritual master, he can see his real position, and, by such an
understanding, he can become fixed in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A man in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is not controlled by the spell of the material modes of nature. It
has already been stated in the Seventh Chapter that one who has surrendered to
Kṛṣṇa is relieved from the activities of material nature. Therefore for one who
is able to see things as they are, the influence of material nature gradually
ceases.

### 14.20


guṇān etān atītya trīn

dehī deha-samudbhavān

janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair

vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute

guṇān—qualities; etān—all these; atītya—transcending; trīn—three; dehī—body;
deha—body; samudbhavān—produced of; janma—birth; mṛtyu—death; jarā—old age;
duḥkhaiḥ—distresses; vimuktaḥ—being freed from; amṛtam—nectar; aśnute—enjoys.

**TRANSLATION**

When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes, he can become
free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can enjoy nectar even
in this life.

**PURPORT**

How one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in full
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit word dehī means
embodied. Although one is within this material body, by his advancement in
spiritual knowledge he can be free from the influence of the modes of nature. He
can enjoy the happiness of spiritual life even in this body because, after
leaving this body, he is certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this
body he can enjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the sign of liberation from this material entanglement,
and this will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freed from the
influence of the modes of material nature, he enters into devotional service.

### 14.21


arjuna uvāca

kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān

atīto bhavati prabho

kim ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs

trīn guṇān ativartate

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; kaiḥ—by which; liṅgaiḥ—symptoms; trīn—three;
guṇān—qualities; etān—all this; atītaḥ—transcend; bhavati—become; prabho—my
Lord; kim—what; ācāraḥ—behavior; katham—what; ca—also; etān—these; trīn—three;
guṇān—qualities; ativartate—transcend.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna inquired: O my dear Lord, by what symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to those modes? What is his behavior? And how does he transcend
the modes of nature?

**PURPORT**

In this verse, Arjuna’s questions are very appropriate. He wants to know the
symptoms of a person who has already transcended the material modes. He first
inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendental person. How can one understand
that he has already transcended the influence of the modes of material nature?
The second question asks how he lives and what his activities are. Are they
regulated or nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can
attain the transcendental nature. That is very important. Unless one knows the
direct means by which one can be situated always transcendentally, there is no
possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these questions put by Arjuna are
very important, and the Lord answers them.

### 14.22-25


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

prakāśaṁ ca pravṛttiṁ ca

moham eva ca pāṇḍava

na dveṣṭi sampravṛttāni

na nivṛttāni kāṅkṣati

udāsīna-vad āsīno

guṇair yo na vicālyate

guṇā vartanta ity evaṁ

yo ’vatiṣṭhati neṅgate

sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ sva-sthaḥ

sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ

tulya-priyāpriyo dhīras

tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ

mānāpamānayos tulyas

tulyo mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ

sarvārambha-parityāgī

guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakāśam ca—and
illumination; pravṛttim ca—and attachment; moham—illusion; eva ca—also;
pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; na dveṣṭi—does not hate; sampravṛttāni—although
developed; na nivṛttāni—nor stop development; kāṅkṣati—desires; udāsīnavat—as if
neutral; āsīnaḥ—situated; guṇaiḥ—by the qualities; yaḥ—one who; na—never;
vicālyate—is agitated; guṇāḥ—the qualities; vartante—is situated; iti
evam—knowing thus; yaḥ—one who; avatiṣṭhati—remains; na—never;
iṅgate—flickering; sama—equally; duḥkha—in distress; sukhaḥ—in happiness;
svasthaḥ—being situated himself; sama—equally; loṣṭa—a lump of earth;
aśma—stone; kāñcanaḥ—gold; tulya—equally disposed; priya—dear;
apriyaḥ—undesirable; dhīraḥ—steadily; tulya—equally; nindā—in defamation;
ātma-saṁstutiḥ—in praise of himself; māna—honor; apamānayoḥ—dishonor;
tulyaḥ—equally; tulyaḥ—equally; mitra—friend; ari—enemy; pakṣayoḥ—in party;
sarva—all; ārambhaḥ—endeavor; parityāgī—renouncer; guṇa-atītaḥ—transcendental to
the material modes of nature; saḥ—he; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate illumination, attachment and
delusion when they are present, nor longs for them when they disappear; who is
seated like one unconcerned, being situated beyond these material reactions of
the modes of nature, who remains firm, knowing that the modes alone are active;
who regards alike pleasure and pain, and looks on a clod, a stone and a piece of
gold with an equal eye; who is wise and holds praise and blame to be the same;
who is unchanged in honor and dishonor, who treats friend and foe alike, who has
abandoned all fruitive undertakings—such a man is said to have transcended the
modes of nature.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna submitted the three different questions, and the Lord answers them one
after another. In these verses, Kṛṣṇa first indicates that a person
transcendentally situated neither envies anyone nor hankers for anything. When a
living entity stays in this material world embodied by the material body, it is
to be understood that he is under the control of one of the three modes of
material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out of the
clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of the
material body, he should be neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will
automatically be forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts
only for sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Kṛṣṇa,
sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material body,
and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The
qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the
self is aloof from such activities. How does he become aloof? He does not desire
to enjoy the body, nor does he desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally
situated, the devotee becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free
from the influence of the modes of material nature.

The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated person.
The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and dishonor
offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not affected by
such false honor and dishonor. He performs his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and
does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He accepts things that are
favorable for his duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of
anything material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend
who helps him in his execution of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he does not hate his
so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on an equal level
because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to do with material
existence. Social and political issues do not affect him because he knows the
situation of temporary upheavals and disturbances. He does not attempt anything
for his own sake. He can attempt anything for Kṛṣṇa, but for his personal self
he does not attain anything. By such behavior one becomes actually
transcendentally situated.

### 14.26


māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

mām—unto Me; ca—also; yaḥ—person; avyabhicāreṇa—without fail; bhakti-yogena—by
devotional service; sevate—renders service; saḥ—he; guṇān—all the modes of
material nature; samatītya—transcending; etān—all this; brahma-bhūyāya—to be
elevated on the Brahman platform; kalpate—is considered.

**TRANSLATION**

One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to
the level of Brahman.

**PURPORT**

This verse is a reply to Arjuna’s third question: What is the means of attaining
to the transcendental position? As explained before, the material world is
acting under the spell of the modes of material nature. One should not be
disturbed by the activities of the modes of nature; instead of putting his
consciousness into such activities, he may transfer his consciousness to Kṛṣṇa
activities. Kṛṣṇa activities are known as bhakti-yoga—always acting for Kṛṣṇa.
This includes not only Kṛṣṇa, but His different plenary expansions such as Rāma
and Nārāyaṇa. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in the service
of any of the forms of Kṛṣṇa, or of His plenary expansions, is considered to be
transcendentally situated. One should also note that all the forms of Kṛṣṇa are
fully transcendental, blissful, full of knowledge and eternal. Such
personalities of Godhead are omnipotent and omniscient, and they possess all
transcendental qualities. So, if one engages himself in the service of Kṛṣṇa or
His plenary expansions with unfailing determination, although these modes of
material nature are very difficult to overcome, he can overcome them easily.
This is already explained in the Seventh Chapter. One who surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa
at once surmounts the influence of the modes of material nature. To be in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness or in devotional service means to acquire the equality of Kṛṣṇa.
The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge, and
the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme, as gold particles are
part of a gold mine. Thus the living entity’s spiritual position is as good as
gold, as good as Kṛṣṇa in quality. The difference of individuality continues,
otherwise there is no question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord
is there, the devotee is there and the activity of exchange of love between the
Lord and the devotee is there. Therefore the individuality of two persons is
present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the individual person,
otherwise there is no meaning to bhakti-yoga. If one is not situated in the same
transcendental position with the Lord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be
a personal assistant to a king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the
qualification is to become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It
is said in the Vedic literature: brahmaiva san brahmāpyeti. One can attain the
Supreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one must qualitatively
become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one does not lose his eternal
Brahman identity as individual soul.
