### 15.11


yatanto yoginaś cainaṁ

paśyanty ātmany avasthitam

yatanto ’py akṛtātmāno

nainaṁ paśyanty acetasaḥ

yatantaḥ—endeavoring; yoginaḥ—transcendentalists; ca—also; enam—this;
paśyanti—can see; ātmani—in the self; avasthitam—situated; yatantaḥ—although
endeavoring; api—although; akṛta-ātmānaḥ—without self-realization; na—does not;
enam—this; paśyanti—can see; acetasaḥ—undeveloped mind.

**TRANSLATION**

The endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization, can see
all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-realization cannot see
what is taking place, though they may try to.

**PURPORT**

There are many transcendentalists in the path of spiritual self-realization, but
one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are changing
in the body of the living entity. The word yoginaḥ is significant in this
connection. In the present day there are many so-called yogīs, and there are
many so-called associations of yogīs, but they are actually blind in the matter
of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise
and are satisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no other
information. They are called yatanto ’py akṛtātmānaḥ. Even though they are
endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized. Such people
cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only those who
are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world, and the
Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-yogīs, those engaged in pure devotional
service in Krsṇa consciousness, can understand how things are taking place.

### 15.12


yad āditya-gataṁ tejo

jagad bhāsayate ’khilam

yac candramasi yac cāgnau

tat tejo viddhi māmakam

yat—that which; āditya-gatam—in the sunshine; tejaḥ—splendor; jagat—the whole
world; bhāsayate—illuminates; akhilam—entirely; yat—that which; candramasi—in
the moon; yat—that which; ca—also; agnau—in the fire; tat—that; tejaḥ—splendor;
viddhi—understand; māmakam—from Me.

**TRANSLATION**

The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world,
comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire are also
from Me.

**PURPORT**

The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The beginning
of knowledge can be established by understanding what the Lord explains here.
Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity. One should simply try to
understand that the splendor of the sun, the splendor of the moon, and the
splendor of electricity or fire are coming from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In such a conception of life, the beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
lies a great deal of advancement for the conditioned soul in this material
world. The living entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, and He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, back
to home. From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating the
whole solar system. There are different universes and solar systems, and there
are different suns, moons and planets also. Sunlight is due to the spiritual
effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. With the rise of the sun,
the activities of human beings are set up. They set fire to prepare their
foodstuff; they set fire to start the factories, etc. So many things are done
with the help of fire. Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to
the living entities. Without their help no living entity can live. So if one can
understand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are emanating
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, then one’s Kṛṣṇa consciousness
will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetables are nourished. The moonshine is
so pleasing that people can easily understand that they are living by the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa. Without His mercy there cannot be
sun, without His mercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there cannot
be fire, and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live. These are
some thoughts to provoke Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the conditioned soul.

### 15.13


gām āviśya ca bhūtāni

dhārayāmy aham ojasā

puṣṇāmi cauṣadhīḥ sarvāḥ

somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ

gām—the planets; āviśya—entering; ca—also; bhūtāni—living entities;
dhārayāmi—sustaining; aham—I; ojasā—by My energy; puṣṇāmi—nourishing; ca—and;
auṣadhīḥ—all vegetables; sarvāḥ—all; somaḥ—the moon; bhūtvā—becoming;
rasa-ātmakaḥ—supplying the juice.

**TRANSLATION**

I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become the moon
and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.

**PURPORT**

It is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by the energy
of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet, and every living
being. That is discussed in the Brahmā-saṁhitā. It is said there that one
plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā, enters into
the planets, the universe, the living entity, and even into the atom. So due to
His entrance, everything is appropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is
there, a living man can float on the water, but when the living spark is out of
the body and the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed it
floats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is dead, he at
once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets are floating in space, and
this is due to the entrance of the supreme energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. His energy is sustaining each planet, just like a handful of dust. If
someone holds a handful of dust, there is no possibility of the dust falling,
but if one throws it in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets,
which are floating in air, are actually held in the fist of the universal form
of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving and unmoving things
stay in their place. It is said that because of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the sun is shining and the planets are steadily moving. Were it not for
Him, all the planets would scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it
is due to the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes all
vegetables. Due to the moon’s influence, the vegetables become delicious.
Without the moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nor taste succulent.
Human society is working, living comfortably and enjoying food due to the supply
from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, mankind could not survive. The word rasātmakaḥ
is very significant. Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme
Lord through the influence of the moon.

### 15.14


ahaṁ vaiśvānaro bhūtvā

prāṇināṁ deham āśritaḥ

prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ

pacāmy annaṁ catur-vidham

aham—I; vaiśvānaraḥ—by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhūtvā—becoming; prāṇinām—of all living entities; deham—body; āśritaḥ—situated;
prāṇa—outgoing air; apāna—downgoing air; samāyuktaḥ—keep balance; pacāmi—digest;
annam—foodstuff; catur-vidham—four kinds of.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of life,
outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds of foodstuff.

**PURPORT**

According to Āyur-vedic śāstra, we understand that there is a fire in the
stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not blazing, there
is no hunger, and when the fire is in order, we become hungry. Sometimes when
the fire is not going nicely, treatment is required. In any case, this fire is
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vedic mantras also confirm
that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the form of fire within the
stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff. Therefore since He is helping
the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff, the living entity is not independant in
the eating process. Unless the Supreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no
possibility of eating. He thus produces and digests foodstuff, and, by His
grace, we are enjoying life. In the Vedānta-sūtra this is also confirmed:
śabdādibhyo ’ntaḥ pratiṣṭhānāc ca. The Lord is situated within sound and within
the body, within the air and even within the stomach as the digestive force.
There are four kinds of foodstuff: some are swallowed, some are chewed, some are
licked up, and some are sucked, and He is the digestive force for all of them.

### 15.15


sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

sarvasya—of all living beings; ca—and; aham—I; hṛdi—in the heart;
sanniviṣṭaḥ—being situated; mattaḥ—from Me; smṛtiḥ—remembrance;
jñānam—knowledge; apohanam ca—and forgetfulness; vedaiḥ—by the Vedas; ca—also;
sarvaiḥ—all; aham—I am; eva—certainly; vedyaḥ—knowable; vedānta-kṛt—the compiler
of the Vedānta; veda-vit—the knower of the Vedas; eva—certainly; ca—and; aham—I.

**TRANSLATION**

I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and
forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known; indeed I am the compiler of
Vedānta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramātmā in everyone’s heart, and it is from
Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything of
his past life, but he has to act according to the direction of the Supreme Lord,
who is witness to all his work. Therefore he begins his work according to his
past deeds. Required knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to
him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only
all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards the
different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as the impersonal
Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the localized Paramātmā, but as
the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as well. The Vedas give the right
direction to the people so that they can properly mold their lives and come back
to Godhead, back to home. The Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa in His incarnation as Vyāsadeva is the compiler of
the Vedānta-sūtra. The commentation on the Vedānta-sūtra by Vyāsadeva in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives the real understanding of Vedānta-sūtra. The Supreme
Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditioned soul He is the
supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his activity, the giver of
knowledge in the form of Vedas and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gītā. He is worshipable by the conditioned
soul. Thus God is all-good; God is all-merciful.

Antaḥpraviṣṭaḥ śāstā janānām. The living entity forgets as soon as he quits his
present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the Supreme Lord.
Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence to renew his work where
he ended his last life. So not only does a living entity enjoy or suffer in this
world according to the dictation from the Supreme Lord situated locally in the
heart, but he receives the opportunity to understand Vedas from Him. If one is
serious to understand the Vedic knowledge, then Kṛṣṇa gives the required
intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for understanding? Because
a living entity individually needs to understand Kṛṣṇa. Vedic literature
confirms this: yo ’sau sarvair vedair gīyate. In all Vedic literature, beginning
from the four Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra and the Upaniṣads and Purāṇas, the glories of
the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performing Vedic rituals, discussing the
Vedic philosophy and worshiping the Lord in devotional service, He is attained.
Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Kṛṣṇa. The Vedas give us
direction to understand Kṛṣṇa and the process of understanding. The ultimate
goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vedānta-sūtra confirms this in the
following words: tat tu samanvayāt. One can attain perfection by understanding
Vedic literature, and one can understand his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by performing the different processes. Thus one can
approach Him and at the end attain the supreme goal, who is no other than the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse, however, the purpose of the
Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas and the goal of Vedas are clearly defined.

### 15.16


dvāv imau puruṣau loke

kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca

kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni

kūṭa-stho ’kṣara ucyate

dvau—two; imau—in this (world); puruṣau—living entities; loke—in the world;
kṣaraḥ—fallible; ca—and; akṣaraḥ—infallible; eva—certainly; ca—and; kṣaraḥ—the
fallible; sarvāṇi—all; bhūtāni—living entities; kūṭasthaḥ—in oneness;
akṣaraḥ—infallible; ucyate—is said.

**TRANSLATION**

There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In the
material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world every entity
is called infallible.

**PURPORT**

As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyāsadeva compiled the
Vedānta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents of the
Vedānta-sūtra: He says that the living entities, who are innumerable, can be
divided into two classes—the fallible and the infallible. The living entities
are eternally separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When they are in contact with the material world, they are called jīva-bhūtāḥ,
and the Sanskrit words given here, sarvāṇi bhūtāni mean that they are fallible.
Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, are
called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have no individuality, but
that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable to the purpose of the
creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, there is no such thing as creation,
but since the Supreme Personality of Godhead has stated in the Vedānta-sūtra
that He is the source of all emanations, that conception is explained.

According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa,
there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this, so there is no
doubt about it. The living entities, who are struggling in this world with the
mind and five senses, have their material bodies which are changing as long as
the living entities are conditioned. One’s body changes due to contact with
matter; matter is changing, so the living entity appears to be changing. But in
the spiritual world the body is not made of matter; therefore there is no
change. In the material world the living entity undergoes six changes—birth,
growth, duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are the
changes of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body does not
change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death. There all
exists in oneness. It is more clearly explained as sarvāṇi bhūtāni: any living
entity who has come in contact with matter, beginning from the first created
being, Brahmā, down to a small ant, is changing its body; therefore they are all
fallible. In the spiritual world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.
