The Divine and Demoniac Natures

### 16.1-3


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir

jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ

dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca

svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas

tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunam

dayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ

mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam

tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucam

adroho nāti-mānitā

bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm

abhijātasya bhārata

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
abhayam—fearlessness; sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ—purification of one’s existence;
jñāna—knowledge; yoga—of linking up; vyavasthitiḥ—the situation; dānam—charity;
damaḥ ca—and controlling the mind; yajñaḥ ca—and performance of sacrifice;
svādhyāyaḥ—study of Vedic literature; tapaḥ—austerity; ārjavam—simplicity;
ahiṁsā—nonviolence; satyam—truthfulness; akrodhaḥ—freedom from anger;
tyāgaḥ—renunciation; śāntiḥ—tranquility; apaiśunam—aversion to faultfinding;
dayā—mercy; bhūteṣu—towards all living entities; aloluptvam—freedom from greed;
mārdavam—gentleness; hrīḥ—modesty; acāpalam—determination; tejaḥ—vigor ;
kṣamā—forgiveness; dhṛtiḥ—fortitude; śaucam—cleanliness; adrohaḥ—freedom from
envy; na—not; atimānitā—expectation of honor; bhavanti—become;
sampadam—qualities; daivīm—transcendental; abhijātasya—one who is born of;
bhārata—O son of Bharata.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one’s existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performance of
sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity; nonviolence,
truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tranquility, aversion to
faultfinding, compassion and freedom from covetousness; gentleness, modesty and
steady determination; vigor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from
envy and the passion for honor—these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata,
belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

**PURPORT**

In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material
world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were compared to the
activities of the living entities, some auspicious, some inauspicious. In the
Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and the asuras, the ungodly, or
demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode of
goodness are considered auspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and
such activities are known as deva prakṛti, transcendental by nature. Those who
are situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of
liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on
the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation. Either they will have to

remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the
species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord
explains both the transcendental nature and its attendant qualities, as well as
the demoniac nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and
disadvantages of these qualities.

The word abhijātasya in reference to one born of transcendental qualities or
godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere is
known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. If the parents want a
child in the godly qualities they should follow the ten principles of the human
being. In Bhagavad-gītā we have studied also before that sex life for begetting
a good child is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Sex life is not condemned provided the process is
used in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness at least
should not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them so they may
become Kṛṣṇa conscious after birth. That should be the advantage of children
born of a father or mother absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

The social institution known as varṇāśrama-dharma—the institution dividing
society into four divisions or castes—is not meant to divide human society
according to birth. Such divisions are in terms of educational qualifications.
They are to keep the society in a state of peace and prosperity. The qualities
mentioned herein are explained as transcendental qualities meant for making a
person progress in spiritual understanding so he can get liberated from the
material world. In the varṇāśrama institution the sannyāsī, or the person in the
renounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual master of
all the social statuses and orders. A brāhmaṇa is considered to be the spiritual
master of the three other sections of a society, namely, the kṣatriyas, the
vaiśyas and the śūdras, but a sannyāsī, who is on the top of the institution, is
considered to be the spiritual master of the brāhmaṇas also. For a sannyāsī, the
first qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyāsī has to be alone
without any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If he thinks, “After leaving my
connections, who will protect me?” he should not accept the renounced order of
life. One must be fully convinced that Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramātmā is always within, that He is seeing
everything and He always knows what one intends to do. One must thus have firm
conviction that Kṛṣṇa as Paramātmā will take care of a soul surrendered to Him.
“I shall never be alone,” one should think. “Even if I live in the darkest
regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by Kṛṣṇa, and He will give me all
protection.” That conviction is called abhayam, without fear. This state of mind
is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life. Then he has to purify
his existence. There are so many rules and regulations to be followed in the
renounced order of life. Most important of all, a sannyāsī is strictly forbidden
to have any intimate relationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk
with a woman in a secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyāsī, and when
He was at Purī His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer their
respects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This is not a sign
of hatred for women as a class, but it is a stricture imposed on the sannyāsī
not to have close connections with women. One has to follow the rules and
regulations of a particular status of life in order to purify his existence. For
a sannyāsī, intimate relations with women and possessions of wealth for sense
gratification are strictly forbidden. The ideal sannyāsī was Lord Caitanya
Himself, and we can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to
women. Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation of Godhead,
accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictly followed the rules and
regulations of the sannyāsa order of the life in connection with association
with woman. One of His personal associates, namely Choṭa Haridāsa, was
personally associated with Lord Caitanya, along with His other confidential
personal associates, but somehow or other this Choṭa Haridāsa looked lustily on
a young woman, and Lord Caitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from
the society of His personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, “For a sannyāsī or
anyone who is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature and trying
to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back to home, back to Godhead,
for him, looking toward material possessions and women for sense
gratification—not even enjoying them, but just looking toward them with such a
propensity—is so condemned that he had better commit suicide before experiencing
such illicit desires.” So these are the processes for purification.

The next item is jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ: being engaged in the cultivation of
knowledge. Sannyāsī life is meant for distributing knowledge to the householders
and others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual advancement. A
sannyāsī is supposed to beg from door to door for his livelihood, but this does
not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of the qualifications of a
transcendentally situated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyāsī goes
from door to door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see the
householders and awaken them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the duty of a
sannyāsī. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his spiritual master, he
should preach Kṛṣṇa with logic and understanding, and if he is not so advanced
he should not accept the renounced order of life. But even if he has accepted
the renounced order of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage
himself fully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate
knowledge. A sannyāsī or one in the renounced order of life must be situated in
fearlessness, sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ (purity) and jñāna-yoga (knowledge).

The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty
percent of their income to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world.
Thus a householder should give in charity to such institutional societies that
are engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There
are different kinds of charities, as will be explained later on, charity in the
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended by the scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance
is not recommended because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should be
given only to propagate Kṛsna consciousness all over the world. That is charity
in the mode of goodness.

Then as far as damaḥ (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant for other
orders of religious society, but it is especially meant for the householder.
Although he has a wife, a householder should not use his senses for sex life
unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the householders even in sex life,
which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not
require children, he should not enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society
enjoys sex life with contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid
the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality but is
demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress in
spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not beget a child
without the purpose of serving Kṛṣṇa. If he is able to beget children who will
be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without
this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure.

Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders because sacrifices
require a large amount of money. Other orders of life, namely the brahmacarya,
the vānaprastha and sannyāsa, have no money; they live by begging. So
performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for the householder. They
should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoined in the Vedic literature, but
such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive, and it is not possible
for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice recommended in this age
is called saṅkīrtana-yajña, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. This is the best and most
inexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. So these three
items, namely charity, sense control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for
the householder.

Then svādhyāyaḥ, Vedic study, and tapas, austerity, and ārjavam, gentleness or
simplicity, are meant for the brahmacarya or student life. Brahmacārīs should
have no connection with women; they should live a life of celibacy and engage
the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of spiritual
knowledge. This is called svādhyāyaḥ. Tapas or austerity is especially meant for
the retired life. One should not remain a householder throughout his whole life;
he must always remember that there are four divisions of life, brahmacarya,
gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So after gṛhastha, householder life, one
should retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five
years in student life, twenty-five in householder life, twenty-five in retired
life and twenty-five in the renounced order of life. These are the regulations
of the Vedic religious discipline. A man retired from household life must
practice austerities of the body, mind and tongue. That is tapasyā. The entire
varṇāśrama-dharma society is meant for tapasyā. Without tapasyā or austerity no
human being can get liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in
life, that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is neither
recommended in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gītā. Such theories are
manufactured by showbottle spiritualists who are trying to gather more
followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not
become attracted. Therefore those who want followers in the name of religion,
just to have a show only, don’t restrict the lives of their students nor their
own lives. But that method is not approved by the Vedas.

As far as simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular order of life
follow this principle, but every member, be he in the brahmacarya-āśrama, or
gṛhastha-āśrama or vānaprastha-āśrama. One must live very simply.

Ahiṁsā means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity. One should
not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even after the killing of
the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification. People are
now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply of grains,
fruits and milk. There is no necessity for animal killing. This injunction is
for everyone. When there is no other alternative, one may kill an animal, but it
should be offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supply
for humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritual
realization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahiṁsā means not
checking anyone’s progressive life. The animals are also making progress in
their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category of animal life to
another. If a particular animal is killed, then his progress is checked. If an
animal is staying in a particular body for so many days or so many years and is
untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form of life to complete
the remaining days in order to be promoted to another species of life. So their
progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one’s palate. This is called
ahiṁsā.

Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some personal
interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the meaning
or the purpose should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master. That is the
process for understanding Vedas. Śruti means that one should hear from the
authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his personal
interest. There are so many commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā that misinterpret the
original text. The real import of the word should be presented, and that should
be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.

Akrodhaḥ means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be
tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger is
the product of the modes of passion and lust, so one who is transcendentally
situated should check himself from anger. Apaiśunam means that one should not
find fault with others or correct them unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief
a thief is not faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very much
offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hrīḥ means that
one should be very modest and must not perform some act which is abominable.
Acāpalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated or frustrated in
some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one should not be sorry
for that; he should make progress with patience and determination. The word
tejaḥ used here is meant for the kṣatriyas. The kṣatriyas should always be very
strong to be able to give protection to the weak. They should not pose
themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required, they must exhibit it.

Śaucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one’s dealings also.
It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who should not deal in the
black market. Nātimānitā, not expecting honor, applies to the śūdras, the worker
class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of
the four classes. They should not be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or
honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the śūdras to
offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order.

All these sixteen qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities. They
should be cultivated according to the different statuses of the social order.
The purport is that even though material conditions are miserable, if these
qualities are developed by practice, by all classes of men, then gradually it is
possible to rise to the highest platform of transcendental realization.

### 16.4


dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca

krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca

ajñānaṁ cābhijātasya

pārtha sampadam āsurīm

dambhaḥ—pride; darpaḥ—arrogance; abhimānaḥ—conceit; ca—and; krodaḥ—anger;
pāruṣyam—harshness; eva—certainly; ca—and; ajñānam—ignorance; ca—and;
abhijātasya—one who is born; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sampadam—nature;
āsurīm—demoniac.

**TRANSLATION**

Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance—these qualities belong
to those of demonic nature, O son of Pṛthā.

**PURPORT**

In this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want to make a
show of religion and advancement in spiritual science, although they do not
follow the principles. They are always arrogant or proud in possessing some type
of education or so much wealth. They desire to be worshiped by others, and
demand respectability, although they do not command respect. Over trifles they
become very angry and speak harshly, not gently. They do not know what should be
done and what should not be done. They do everything whimsically, according to
their own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. These demoniac
qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of their bodies in the wombs
of their mothers, and as they grow they manifest all these inauspicious
qualities.

### 16.5


daivī sampad vimokṣāya

nibandhāyāsurī matā

mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm

abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava

daivī—transcendental; sampat—nature; vimokṣāya—meant for liberation;
nibandhāya—for bondage; āsurī—demoniac qualities; matā—it is considered; mā—do
not; śucaḥ—worry; sampadam—nature; daivīm—transcendental; abhijātaḥ—born;
asi—you are; pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu.

**TRANSLATION**

The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the demonic
qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pāṇḍu, for you are born with
the divine qualities.

**PURPORT**

Lord Kṛṣṇa encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with demoniac
qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac because he was
considering the pro’s and con’s. He was considering whether respectable persons
such as Bhīṣma and Droṇa should be killed or not, so he was not acting under the
influence of anger, false prestige, or harshness. Therefore he was not of the
quality of the demons. For a kṣatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at the
enemy is considered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is demoniac.
Therefore, there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who performs the
regulated principles of the different orders of life is transcendentally
situated.

### 16.6


dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin

daiva āsura eva ca

daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta

āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu

dvau—two; bhūta-sargau—created living beings; loke—in this world; asmin—this;
daivaḥ—godly; āsuraḥ—demoniac; eva—certainly; ca—and; daivaḥ—divine;
vistaraśaḥ—at great length; proktaḥ—said; asuram—demoniac; pārtha—O son of
Pṛthā; me—from Me; śṛṇu—just hear.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is
called the divine and the other demonic. I have already explained to you at
length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

**PURPORT**

Lord Kṛṣṇa, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine qualities, is
now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living entities are divided
into two classes in this world. Those who are born with divine qualities follow
a regulated life; that is to say they abide by the injunctions in scriptures and
by the authorities. One should perform duties in the light of authoritative
scripture. This mentality is called divine. One who does not follow the
regulative principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who acts
according to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no other criterion
but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. It is mentioned in
Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons are born of the
Prajāpati; the only difference is that one class obeys the Vedic injunctions and
the other does not.
