### 16.7


pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca

janā na vidur āsurāḥ

na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro

na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate

pravṛttim—proper action; ca—also; nivṛttim—improper action; ca—and;
janāḥ—persons; na—never; viduḥ—know; āsurāḥ—in demoniac quality; na—never;
śaucam—cleanliness; na—nor; api—also; ca—and; ācāraḥ—behavior; na—never;
satyam—truth; teṣu—in them; vidyate—there is.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to be
done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

**PURPORT**

In every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules and
regulations which are followed from the beginning, especially among the Āryans,
those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as the most advanced
civilized peoples. Those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions are
supposed to be demons. Therefore it is stated here that the demons do not know
the scriptural rules, nor do they have any inclination to follow them. Most of
them do not know them, and even if some of them know, they have not the tendency
to follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to act in terms of the
Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either externally or internally.

One should always be careful to keep his body clean by bathing, brushing teeth,
changing clothes, etc. As far as internal cleanliness is concerned, one should
always remember the holy names of God and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. The demons neither
like nor follow all these rules for external and internal cleanliness.

As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding human behavior,
such as the Manu-saṁhitā, which is the law of the human race. Even up to today,
those who are Hindu follow the Manu-saṁhitā. Laws of inheritance and other
legalities are derived from this book. Now, in the Manu-saṁhitā, it is clearly
stated that a woman should not be given freedom. That does not mean that women
are to be kept as slaves, but they are like children. Children are not given
freedom, but that does not mean that they are kept as slaves. The demons have
now neglected such injunctions, and they think that women should be given as
much freedom as men. However, this has not improved the social condition of the
world. Actually, a woman should be given protection at every stage of life. She
should be given protection by the father in her younger days, by the husband in
her youth, and by the grownup sons in her old age. This is proper social
behavior according to the Manu-saṁhitā. But modern education has artificially
devised a puffed up concept of womanly life, and therefore marriage is
practically now an imagination in human society. Nor is the moral condition of
woman very good now. The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which
is good for society, and because they do not follow the experience of great
sages and the rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the social condition
of the demoniac people is very miserable.

### 16.8


asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te

jagad āhur anīśvaram

aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ

kim anyat kāma-haitukam

asatyam—unreal; apratiṣṭham—without foundation; te—they; jagat—the cosmic
manifestation; āhuḥ—is said; anīśvaram—with no controller; aparaspara—by mutual
lust; sambhūtam—caused; kim anyat—there is no other cause; kāma-haitukam—it is
due to lust only.

**TRANSLATION**

They say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and that there
is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and has no cause other than
lust.

**PURPORT**

The demoniac conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no cause, no
effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They say that this
cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material actions and reactions. They
do not think that the world was created by God for a certain purpose. They have
their own theory: that the world has come about in its own way and that there is
no reason to believe that there is a God behind it. For them there is no
difference between spirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme Spirit.
Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be a mass of
ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatever manifestation
exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They take it for granted that all
manifestation of diversity is a display of ignorance. Just as in a dream we may
create so many things, which actually have no existence, so when we are awake we
shall see that everything is simply a dream. But factually, although the demons
say that life is a dream, they are very expert in enjoying this dream. And so,
instead of acquiring knowledge, they become more and more implicated in their
dreamland. They conclude that as a child is simply the result of sexual
intercourse between man and woman, this world is born without any soul. For them
it is only a combination of matter that has produced the living entities, and
there is no question of the existence of the soul. As many living creatures come
out from perspiration and from a dead body without any cause, similarly, the
whole living world has come out of the material combinations of the cosmic
manifestation. Therefore material nature is the cause of this manifestation, and
there is no other cause. They do not believe in the words of Kṛṣṇa in
Bhagavad-gītā: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. “Under My direction
the whole material world is moving.” In other words, amongst the demons there is
no perfect knowledge of the creation of this world; every one of them has some
particular theory of his own. According to them, one interpretation of the
scriptures is as good as another, for they do not believe in a standard
understanding of the scriptural injunctions.

### 16.9


etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya

naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ

prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ

kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ

etām—thus; dṛṣṭim—vision; avaṣṭabhya—accepting; naṣṭa—lost; ātmānaḥ—self;
alpa-buddhayaḥ—less intelligent; prabhavanti—flourish; ugra-karmāṇaḥ—in painful
activities; kṣayāya—for destruction; jagataḥ—of the world; ahitāḥ—unbeneficial.

**TRANSLATION**

Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and who
have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to destroy
the world.

**PURPORT**

The demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to destruction.
The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. The materialists, who have
no concept of God, think that they are advancing. But, according to
Bhagavad-gītā, they are unintelligent and devoid of all sense. They try to enjoy
this material world to the utmost limit and therefore always engage in inventing
something for sense gratification. Such materialistic inventions are considered
to be advancement of human civilization, but the result is that people grow more
and more violent and more and more cruel, cruel to animals and cruel to other
human beings. They have no idea how to behave toward one another. Animal killing
is very prominent amongst demoniac people. Such people are considered the
enemies of the world because ultimately they will invent or create something
which will bring destruction to all. Indirectly, this verse anticipates the
invention of nuclear weapons, of which the whole world is today very proud. At
any moment war may take place, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such
things are created solely for the destruction of the world, and this is
indicated here. Due to godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society;
they are not meant for the peace and prosperity of the world.


### 16.10


kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ

dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ

mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān

pravartante ’śuci-vratāḥ

kāmam—lust; āśritya—taking shelter of; duṣpūram—insatiable; dambha—pride;
māna—false prestige; mada-anvitāḥ—absorbed in conceit; mohāt—by illusion;
gṛhītvā—taking; asat—nonpermanent; grāhān—things; pravartante—flourish;
aśuci—unclean; vratāḥ—avowed.

**TRANSLATION**

The demoniac, taking shelter of insatiable lust, pride and false prestige, and
being thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the
impermanent.

**PURPORT**

The demoniac mentality is described here. The demons’ lust is never satiated.
They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable desires for material
enjoyment. Although they are always full of anxieties on account of accepting
nonpermanent things, they still continue to engage in such activities out of
illusion. They have no knowledge and cannot tell that they are heading the wrong
way. Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create their own God,
create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is that they become
more and more attracted to two things—sex enjoyment and accumulation of material
wealth. The word aśuci-vratāḥ, unclean vow, is very significant in this
connection. Such demoniac people are only attracted by wine, women, gambling and
meat eating; those are their aśuci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false
prestige, they create some principles of religion which are not approved by the
Vedic injunctions. Although such demoniac people are most abominable in the
world, still, by artificial means, the world creates a false honor for them.
Although they are gliding toward hell, they consider themselves very much
advanced.

### 16.11-12


cintām aparimeyāṁ ca

pralayāntām upāśritāḥ

kāmopabhoga-paramā

etāvad iti niścitāḥ

āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ

kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ

īhante kāma-bhogārtham

anyāyenārtha-sañcayān

cintām—fears and anxieties; aparimeyām—unmeasurable; ca—and; pralaya-antām—unto
the point of death; upāśritāḥ—having taken shelter of them; kāma-upabhoga—sense
gratification; paramāḥ—the highest goal of life; etāvat—thus; iti—in this way;
niścitāḥ—ascertain; āśā-pāśa—entanglement in the network of hope; śataiḥ—by
hundreds; baddhāḥ—being bound; kāma—lust; krodha—anger; parāyaṇāḥ—always
situated in that mentality; īhante—desire; kāma—lust; bhoga—sense enjoyment;
artham—for that purpose; anyāyena—illegally; artha—wealth; sañcayān—accumulate.

**TRANSLATION**

They believe that to gratify the senses unto the end of life is the prime
necessity of human civilization. Thus there is no end to their anxiety. Being
bound by hundreds and thousands of desires, by lust and anger, they secure money
by illegal means for sense gratification.

**PURPORT**

The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate goal of
life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not believe in life
after death, and they do not believe that one takes on different types of bodies
according to one’s karma, or activities in this world. Their plans for life are
never finished, and they go on preparing plan after plan, all of which are never
finished. We have personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality,
who, even at the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his
life for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such foolish
people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a moment. When
the notice is there, there is no consideration of the man’s desire. The laws of
nature do not allow a second beyond what one is destined to enjoy.

The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul within himself,
performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense gratification. He does
not know that there is a witness sitting within his heart. The Supersoul is
observing the activities of the individual soul. As it is stated in the Vedic
literature, the Upaniṣads, there are two birds sitting in one tree; the one is
acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of the branches, and the other is
witnessing. But one who is demoniac has no knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has
he any faith; therefore he feels free to do anything for sense enjoyment,
regardless of the consequences.
