### 10.4-5


buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ

kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ

sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo

bhayaṁ cābhayam eva ca

ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis

tapo dānaṁ yaśo ’yaśaḥ

bhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ

matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ

buddhiḥ—intelligence; jñānam—knowledge; asam-mohaḥ—freedom from doubt;
kṣamā—forgiveness; satyam—truthfulness; damaḥ—control of the senses;
śamaḥ—control of the mind; sukham—happiness; duḥkham—distress; bhavaḥ—birth;
abhāvaḥ—death; bhayam—fear; ca—also; abhayam—without fear; eva—also; ca—and;
ahiṁsā—nonviolence; samatā—equilibrium; tuṣṭiḥ—satisfaction; tapaḥ—penance;
dānam—charity; yaśaḥ—fame; ayaśaḥ—infamy; bhavanti—become; bhāvāḥ—natures;
bhūtānām—of living entities; mattaḥ—from Me; eva—certainly;
pṛthak-vidhāḥ—differently arranged.

**TRANSLATION**

Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, self-control and calmness, pleasure and pain, birth, death, fear,
fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame
and infamy are created by Me alone.

**PURPORT**

The different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are all created
by Kṛṣṇa, and they are described here.

Intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in proper perspective, and
knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and what is matter. Ordinary
knowledge obtained by a university education pertains only to matter, and it is
not accepted here as knowledge. Knowledge means knowing the distinction between
spirit and matter. In modern education there is no knowledge about the spirit;
they are simply taking care of the material elements and bodily needs. Therefore
academic knowledge is not complete.

Asaṁmohaḥ, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is not
hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy. Slowly but
surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should be accepted blindly;
everything should be accepted with care and with caution. Kṣamā, forgiveness,
should be practiced, and one should excuse the minor offenses of others. Satyam,
truthfulness, means that facts should be presented as they are for the benefit
of others. Facts should not be misrepresented. According to social conventions,
it is said that one can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But
that is not truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straight and forward
way, so that others will understand actually what the facts are. If a man is a
thief and if people are warned that he is a thief, that is truth. Although
sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one should not refrain from speaking it.
Truthfulness demands that the facts be presented as they are for the benefit of
others. That is the definition of truth.

Self-control means that the senses should not be used for unnecessary personal
enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the proper needs of the
senses, but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental for spiritual
advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained from unnecessary use.
Similarly, the mind should not indulge in unnecessary thoughts; that is called
śamaḥ, or calmness. Nor should one spend one’s time pondering over earning
money. That is a misuse of the thinking power. The mind should be used to
understand the prime necessity of human beings, and that should be presented
authoritatively. The power of thought should be developed in association with
persons who are authorities in the scriptures, saintly persons and spiritual
masters and those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham, pleasure or
happiness, should always be in that which is favorable for the cultivation of
the spiritual knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And similarly, that which is
painful or which causes distress is that which is unfavorable for the
cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Anything favorable for the development of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be accepted, and anything unfavorable should be
rejected.

Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as the soul is
concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we have discussed in the
beginning of Bhagavad-gītā. Birth and death apply to one’s embodiment in the
material world. Fear is due to worrying about the future. A person in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness has no fear because by his activities he is sure to go back to the
spiritual sky, back home, back to Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright.
Others, however, do not know what their future holds; they have no knowledge of
what the next life holds. So they are therefore in constant anxiety. If we want
to get free from anxiety, then the best course is to understand Kṛṣṇa and be
situated always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In that way we will be free from all
fear. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. it is stated that fear is caused by our
absorption in the illusory energy, but those who are free from the illusory
energy, those who are confident that they are not the material body, that they
are spiritual parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are therefore
engaged in the transcendental service of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to
fear. Their future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons who are
not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Bhayam, fearlessness, is only possible for one in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Ahiṁsā, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which will put others
into misery or confusion. Material activities that are promised by so many
politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc., do not produce very good
results because the politicians and philanthropists have no transcendental
vision; they do not know what is actually beneficial for human society. Ahiṁsā
means that people should be trained in such a way that the full utilization of
the human body can be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual
realization, so any movement or any commissions which do not further that end
commit violence on the human body. That which furthers the future spiritual
happiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.

Samatā, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. To be very
much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This material world
should be accepted without attachment or aversion. Similarly, that which is
favorable for prosecuting Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be accepted; that which is
unfavorable should be rejected. That is called samatā, equanimity. A person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness has nothing to reject and nothing to accept unless it is
useful in the prosecution of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Tuṣṭiḥ, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more and more
material goods by unnecessary activity. One should be satisfied with whatever is
obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord; that is called satisfaction. Tapas
means austerity or penance. There are many rules and definitions in the Vedas
which apply here, like rising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes
it is very troublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntary
trouble one may suffer in this way is called penance. Similarly, there are
prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One may not be inclined
to practice such fasting, but because of his determination to make advancement
in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he should accept such bodily troubles
which are recommended. However, one should not fast unnecessarily or against
Vedic injunctions. One should not fast for some political purpose; that is
described in Bhagavad-gītā as fasting in ignorance, and anything done in
ignorance or passion does not lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in
the mode of goodness does advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of the
Vedic injunctions enriches one in spiritual knowledge.

As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of his earnings to
some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that which is conducted in
terms of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is not only a good cause, but it is the best
cause. Because Kṛṣṇa is good, His cause is also good. Thus charity should be
given to a person who is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. According to Vedic
literature, it is enjoined that charity should be given to the brāhmaṇas. This
practice is still followed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic
injunction. But still the injunction is that charity should be given to the
brāhmaṇas. Why? Because they are engaged in higher cultivation of spiritual
knowledge. A brāhmaṇa is supposed to devote his whole life to understanding
Brahman. A brahma-jana is one who knows Brahman; he is called a brāhmaṇa. Thus
charity is offered to the brāhmaṇas because since they are always engaged in
higher spiritual service, they have no time to earn their livelihood. In the
Vedic literature, charity is also to be awarded to the renouncer of life, the
sannyāsī. The sannyāsīs beg from door to door, not for money but for missionary
purposes. The system is that they go from door to door to awaken the
householders from the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged
in family affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in life—awakening
their Kṛṣṇa consciousness—it is the business of the sannyāsīs to go as beggars
to the householders and encourage them to be Kṛṣṇa conscious. As it is said in
the Vedas, one should awake and achieve what is due him in this human form of
life. This knowledge and method is distributed by the sannyāsīs; hence charity
is to be given to the renouncer of life, to the brāhmaṇas, and similar good
causes, not to any whimsical cause.

Yaśaḥ, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a man is famous
when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. If one has become a
great man in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and it is known, then he is truly famous. One
who does not have such fame is infamous.

All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in human society and in
the society of the demigods. There are many forms of humanity on other planets,
and these qualities are there. Now, for one who wants to advance in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, Kṛṣṇa creates all these qualities, but the person develops them
himself from within. One who engages in the devotional service of the Supreme
Lord develops all the good qualities, as arranged by the Supreme Lord.

Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Kṛṣṇa. Nothing can manifest in
this material world which is not in Kṛṣṇa. That is knowledge; although we know
that things are differently situated, we should realize that everything flows
from Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.6


maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve

catvāro manavas tathā

mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā

yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ

maharṣayaḥ—the great sages; sapta—seven; pūrve—before; catvāraḥ—four;
manavaḥ—Manus; tathā—also; mat-bhāvāḥ—born of Me; mānasāḥ—from the mind;
jātāḥ—born; yeṣām—of them; loke—the planets; imāḥ—all this; prajāḥ—population.

**TRANSLATION**

The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the Manus
[progenitors of mankind] are born out of My mind, and all creatures in these
planets descend from them.

**PURPORT**

The Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population. Brahmā
is the original creature born out of the energy of the Supreme Lord known as
Hiraṇyagarbha. And from Brahmā all the seven great sages, and before them four
other great sages, named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana, and Sanatkumāra, and the
Manus, are manifest. All these twenty-five great sages are known as the
patriarchs of the living entities all over the universe. There are innumerable
universes and innumerable planets within each universe, and each planet is full
of population of different varieties. All of them are born of these twenty-five
patriarchs. Brahmā underwent penance for one thousand years of the demigods
before he realized by the grace of Kṛṣṇa how to create. Then from Brahmā,
Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana, and Sanatkumāra came out, then Rudra, and then the
seven sages, and in this way all the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas are born out of the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Brahmā is known as pitāmaha, the
grandfather, and Kṛṣṇa is known as the prapitā-maha, the father of the
grandfather. That is stated in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā. (### .
11.39)

### 10.7


etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca

mama yo vetti tattvataḥ

so ’vikalpena yogena

yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ

etām—all this; vibhūtiṁ—opulence; yogam ca—also mystic power; mama—of Mine;
yaḥ—anyone; vetti—knows; tattvataḥ—factually; saḥ—he; avikalpena—without
division; yogena—in devotional service; yujyate—engaged; na—never; atra—here;
saṁśayaḥ—doubt.

**TRANSLATION**

He who knows in truth this glory and power of Mine engages in unalloyed
devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

**PURPORT**

The highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the different
opulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional service. Generally
people know that God is great, but they do not know in detail how God is great.
Here are the details. If one knows factually how God is great, then naturally he
becomes a surrendered soul and engages himself in the devotional service of the
Lord. When one factually knows the opulences of the Supreme, there is no
alternative but to surrender to Him. This factual knowledge can be known from
the descriptions in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā and similar literatures.

In the administration of this universe there are many demigods distributed
throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them are Brahmā, Lord Śiva and
the four great Kumāras and other patriarchs. There are many forefathers of the
population of the universe, and all of them are born of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the original forefather of all
forefathers.

These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmly
convinced of them, he accepts Kṛṣṇa with great faith and without any doubt, and
he engages in devotional service. All this particular knowledge is required in
order to increase one’s interest in the loving devotional service of the Lord.
One should not neglect to understand fully how great Kṛṣṇa is, for by knowing
the greatness of Kṛṣṇa one will be able to be fixed in sincere devotional
service.
