### 10.19


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

hanta te kathayiṣyāmi

divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ

prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha

nāsty anto vistarasya me

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta—yes; te—unto
you; kathayiṣyāmi—I shall speak; divyāḥ—divine; hi—certainly;
ātma-vibhūtayaḥ—personal opulences; prādhānyataḥ—principally; kuruśreṣṭha—O best
of the Kurus; na asti—there is no; antaḥ—limit; vistarasya—to the extent; me—My.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous manifestations,
but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for My opulence is limitless.

**PURPORT**

It is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Kṛṣṇa and His opulences. The
senses of the individual soul are imperfect and do not permit him to understand
the totality of Kṛṣṇa’s affairs. Still the devotees try to understand Kṛṣṇa, but
not on the principle that they will be able to understand Kṛṣṇa fully at any
specific time or in any state of life. Rather, the very topics of Kṛṣṇa are so
relishable that they appear to them as nectar. Thus they enjoy them. In
discussing Kṛṣṇa’s opulences and His diverse energies, the pure devotees take
transcendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and discuss them. Kṛṣṇa
knows that living entities do not understand the extent of His opulences; He
therefore agrees to state only the principal manifestations of His different
energies. The word prādhānyataḥ (principal) is very important because we can
understand only a few of the principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His
features are unlimited. It is not possible to understand them all. And vibhūti,
as used in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls the whole
manifestation. In the Amara-kośa dictionary it is stated that vibhūti indicates
an exceptional opulence.

The impersonalist or the pantheist cannot understand the exceptional opulences
of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divine energy. Both in the
material world and in the spiritual world His energies are distributed in every
variety of manifestation. Now Kṛṣṇa is describing what can be directly perceived
by the common man; thus part of His variegated energy is described in this way.

### 10.20


aham ātmā guḍākeśa

sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ

aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca

bhūtānām anta eva ca

aham—I; ātmā—soul; guḍākeśa—O Arjuna; sarva-bhūta—all living entities;
āśaya-sthitaḥ—situated within; aham—I am; ādiḥ—origin; ca—also; madhyam—middle;
ca—also; bhūtānām—all living entities; antaḥ—end; eva—certainly; ca—and.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the Self, O Guḍākeśa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am the
beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

**PURPORT**

In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Guḍākeśa, which means one who has conquered
the darkness of sleep. For those who are sleeping in the darkness of ignorance,
it is not possible to understand how the Supreme Godhead manifests Himself in
the material and spiritual worlds. Thus this address by Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna is
significant. Because Arjuna is above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead
agrees to describe His various opulences.

Kṛṣṇa first informs Arjuna that He is the Self or soul of the entire cosmic
manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before the material creation,
the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts the Puruṣa incarnations, and
from Him everything begins. Therefore He is ātmā, the soul of the mahat-tattva,
the universal elements. The total material energy is not the cause of the
creation, but actually the Mahā-Visṇu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total
material energy. He is the soul. When Mahā-Viṣṇu enters into the manifested
universes, He again manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every entity.
We have experience that the personal body of the living entity exists due to the
presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of the spiritual spark,
the body cannot develop. Similarly, the material manifestation cannot develop
unless the Supreme Soul of Kṛṣṇa enters.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in all
manifested universes. A description of the three puruṣa-avatāras is given in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. “The Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests three features,
as Kāraṇodakaśāyī Visṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, in this
material manifestation.” The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, the cause of all causes, lies
down in the cosmic ocean as Mahā-Viṣṇu or Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and therefore
Kṛṣṇa is the beginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universal
manifestation, and the end of all the energy.

### 10.21


ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur

jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān

marīcir marutām asmi

nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī

ādityānām—of the Ādityas; aham—I am; viṣṇuḥ—the Supreme Lord; jyotiṣām—of all
luminaries; raviḥ—the sun; aṁśumān—radiant; marīciḥ—Marīci; marutām—of the
Marutas; asmi—I am; nakṣatrāṇām—of stars; aham—I am; śaśī—the moon.

**TRANSLATION**

Of the Ādityas I am Viṣṇu, of lights I am the radiant sun, I am Marīci of the
Maruts, and among the stars I am the moon.

**PURPORT**

There are twelve Ādityas, of which Kṛṣṇa is the principal. And among all the
luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and in the Brahma-saṁhitā
the sun is accepted as the glowing effulgence of the Supreme Lord and is
considered to be one of His eyes. Marīci is the controlling deity of the
heavenly spaces. Among the stars, the moon is most prominent at night, and thus
the moon represents Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.22


vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi

devānām asmi vāsavaḥ

indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi

bhūtānām asmi cetanā

vedānām—of all the Vedas; sāma-vedaḥ—the Sāma-veda; asmi—I am; devānām—of all
the demigods; asmi—I am; vāsavaḥ—heavenly king; indriyāṇām—of all the senses;
manaḥ—the mind; ca—also; asmi—I am; bhūtānām—of all living entities; asmi—I am;
cetanā—the living force.

**TRANSLATION**

Of the Vedas I am the Sāma-veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the senses I am
the mind, and in living beings I am the living force [knowledge].

**PURPORT**

The difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no consciousness
like the living entity; therefore this consciousness is supreme and eternal.
Consciousness cannot be produced by a combination of matter.

### 10.23


rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi

vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām

vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi

meruḥ śikhariṇām aham

rudrāṇām—of all the Rudras; śaṅkaraḥ—Lord Śiva; ca—also; asmi—I am; vitteśaḥ—the
lord of the treasury; yakṣa-rakṣasām—of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; vasūnām—of the
Vasus; pāvakaḥ—fire; ca—also; asmi—I am; meruḥ—Meru; śikhariṇām—of all
mountains; aham—I am.

**TRANSLATION**

Of all the Rudras I am Lord Śiva; of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas I am the lord of
wealth [Kuvera]; of theVasus I am fire [Agni], and of the mountains I am Meru.

**PURPORT**

There are eleven Rudras, of whom Śaṅkara, Lord Śiva, is predominant. He is the
incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the modes of ignorance in the
universe. Among the demigods Kuvera is the chief treasurer, and he is a
representation of the Supreme Lord. Meru is a mountain famed for its rich
natural resources.


### 10.24


purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ

viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim

senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ

sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ

purodhasām—of all priests; ca—also; mukhyam—chief; mām—Me; viddhi—understand;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; bṛhaspatim—Bṛhaspati; senānīnām—of all commanders; aham—I
am; skandaḥ—Kārtikeya; sarasām—of all reservoirs of water; asmi—I am;
sāgaraḥ—the ocean.

**TRANSLATION**

Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Bṛhaspati, the lord of devotion.
Of generals I am Skanda, the lord of war; and of bodies of water I am the ocean.

**PURPORT**

Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the king of
the heavens. The planet in which he reigns is called Indraloka. Bṛhaspati is
Indra’s priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings, Bṛhaspati is the
chief of all priests. And as Indra is the chief of all kings, similarly Skanda,
the son of Pārvatī and Lord Śiva, is the chief of all military commanders. And
of all bodies of water, the ocean is the greatest. These representations of
Kṛṣṇa only give hints of His greatness.

### 10.25


maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ

girām asmy ekam akṣaram

yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi

sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ

maharṣīṇām—among the great sages; bhṛguḥ—Bhṛgu; aham—I am; girām—of vibrations;
asmi—I am; ekam akṣaram—praṇava; yajñānām—of sacrifices; japa-yajñaḥ—chanting;
asmi—I am; sthāvarāṇām—of immovable things; himālayaḥ—the Himalayan mountains.

**TRANSLATION**

Of the great sages I am Bhṛgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental om. Of
sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I
am the Himalayas.

**PURPORT**

Brahmā, the first living creature within the universe, created several sons for
the propagation of various kinds of species. The most powerful of his sons is
Bhṛgu, who is also the greatest sage. Of all the transcendental vibrations, the
“om” (omkara) represents the Supreme. Of all the sacrifices, the chanting of
Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare is the purest representation of Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes animal sacrifices are
recommended, but in the sacrifice of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, there is no
question of violence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in
the worlds is a representation of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the Himalayas, the greatest
mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain named Meru was
mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable, whereas the
Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greater than Meru.

### 10.26


aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ

devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ

gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ

siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ

aśvatthaḥ—the banyan tree; sarva-vṛkṣāṇām—of all trees; devarṣīṇām—of all the
sages amongst the demigods; ca—and; nāradaḥ—Nārada; gandharvāṇām—the citizens of
the Gandharva planet; citrarathaḥ—Citraratha; siddhānām—of all those who are
perfected; kapilaḥ muniḥ—Kapila Muni.

**TRANSLATION**

Of all trees I am the holy fig tree, and amongst sages and demigods I am Nārada.
Of the singers of the gods [Gandharvas] I am Citraratha, and among perfected
beings I am the sage Kapila.

**PURPORT**

The fig tree (aśvattha) is one of the most beautiful and highest trees, and
people in India often worship it as one of their daily morning rituals. Amongst
the demigods they also worship Nārada, who is considered the greatest devotee in
the universe. Thus he is the representation of Kṛṣṇa as a devotee. The Gandharva
planet is filled with entities who sing beautifully, and among them the best
singer is Citraratha. Amongst the perpetually living entities, Kapila is
considered an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, and His philosophy is mentioned in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but his philosophy was
atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference between them.
