### 10.36


dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi

tejas tejasvinām aham

jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi

sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham

dyūtam—gambling; chalayatām—of all cheats; asmi—I am; tejaḥ—splendid;
tejasvinām—of everything splendid; aham—I am; jayaḥ—victory; asmi—I am;
vyavasāyaḥ—adventure; asmi—I am; sattvam—strength; sattvavatām—of all the
strong; aham—I am.

**TRANSLATION**

I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am
victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the strong.

**PURPORT**

There are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Kṛṣṇa. As the
Supreme, Kṛṣṇa can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Kṛṣṇa chooses to
deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. His greatness is not
simply one-sided—it is all-sided.

Among the victorious, He is victory. He is the splendor of the splendid. Among
enterprising industrialists, He is the most enterprising. Among adventurers, He
is the most adventurous, and among the strong, He is the strongest. When Kṛṣṇa
was present on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in His
childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him in cheating, no one
can surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him in victory, no one can
surpass Him in enterprise, and no one can surpass Him in strength.

### 10.37


vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi

pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañjayaḥ

munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ

kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ

vṛṣṇīnām—of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi; vāsudevaḥ—Kṛṣṇa in Dvāraka; asmi—I am;
pāṇḍavānām—of the Pāṇḍavas; dhanañjayaḥ—Arjuna; munīnām—of the sages; api—also;
aham—I am; vyāsaḥ—Vyāsa, the compiler of all Vedic literature; kavīnām—of all
great thinkers; uśanā—Uśanā; kaviḥ—the thinker.

**TRANSLATION**

Of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi I am Vāsudeva, and of the Pāṇḍavas I am Arjuna. Of
the sages I am Vyāsa, and among great thinkers I am Uśanā.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Vāsudeva is the
immediate expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Both Lord Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva appear as the sons of
Vasudeva. Amongst the sons of Pāṇḍu, Arjuna is famous and valiant. Indeed, he is
the best of men and therefore represents Kṛṣṇa. Among the munis, or learned men
conversant in Vedic knowledge, Vyāsa is the greatest because he explained Vedic
knowledge in many different ways for the understanding of the common mass of
people in this age of Kali. And Vyāsa is also known as an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa;
therefore Vyāsa also represents Kṛṣṇa. Kavis are those who are capable of
thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis, Uśanā was the
spiritual master of the demons; he was extremely intelligent, far-seeing,
political and spiritual in every way. Thus Uśanā is another representative of
the opulence of Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.38


daṇḍo damayatām asmi

nītir asmi jigīṣatām

maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ

jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham

daṇḍaḥ—punishment; damayatām—of all separation; asmi—I am; nītiḥ—morality;
asmi—I am; jigīṣatām—of the victorious; maunam—silence; ca—and; eva—also; asmi—I
am; guhyānām—of secrets; jñānam—knowledge; jñānavatām—of the wise; aham—I am.

**TRANSLATION**

Among punishments I am the rod of chastisement, and of those who seek victory, I
am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I am wisdom.

**PURPORT**

There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are those that
cut down the miscreants. When miscreants are punished, the rod of chastisement
represents Kṛṣṇa. Among those who are trying to be victorious in some field of
activity, the most victorious element is morality. Among the confidential
activities of hearing, thinking and meditating, silence is most important
because by silence one can make progress very quickly. The wise man is he who
can discriminate between matter and spirit, between God’s superior and inferior
natures. Such knowledge is Kṛṣṇa Himself.

### 10.39


yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ

bījaṁ tad aham arjuna

na tad asti vinā yat syān

mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram

yat—whatever; ca—also; api—may be; sarva-bhūtānām—of all creations; bījam—the
seed; tat—that; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna; na—not; tat—that; asti—there is;
vinā—without; yat—that; syāt—exists; mayā—by Me; bhūtam—created;
carācaram—moving and unmoving.

**TRANSLATION**

Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is no
being—moving or unmoving—that can exist without Me.

**PURPORT**

Everything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is Kṛṣṇa.
Without Kṛṣṇa’s energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is called omnipotent.
Without His potency, neither the movable nor the unmovable can exist. Whatever
existence is not founded on the energy of Kṛṣṇa is called māyā, that which is
not.

### 10.40


nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ

vibhūtīnāṁ parantapa

eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto

vibhūter vistaro mayā

na—nor; antaḥ—a limit; asti—is there; mama—of My; divyānām—divine;
vibhūtīnam—opulences; parantapa—O conquerer of the enemies; eṣaḥ—all this;
tu—that; uddeśataḥ—examples; proktaḥ—spoken; vibhūteḥ—opulences;
vistaraḥ—expanded; mayā—by Me.

**TRANSLATION**

O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations. What
I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.

**PURPORT**

As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies of the
Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit to such opulences;
therefore not all the opulences and energies can be explained. Simply a few
examples are being described to Arjuna to pacify his inquisitiveness.

### 10.41


yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ

śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā

tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ

mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam

yat yat—whatever; vibhūti—opulences; mat—having; sattvam—existence;
śrīmat—beautiful; ūrjitam—glorious; eva—certainly; vā—or; tat tat—all those;
eva—certainly; avagaccha—you must know; tvam—you; mama—My; tejaḥ—splendor;
aṁśa—partly; sambhavam—born of.

**TRANSLATION**

Know that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but a spark
of My splendor.

**PURPORT**

Any glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a fragmental
manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s opulence, whether it be in the spiritual or material
world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should be considered to represent
Kṛṣṇa’s opulence.

### 10.42


atha vā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

athavā—or; bahunā—many; etena—by this kind; kim—what; jñātena—knowing; tava—you;
arjuna—O Arjuna; viṣṭabhya—entire; aham—I; idam—this; kṛtsnam—all
manifestations; eka—one; aṁśena—part; sthithaḥ—situated; jagat—in the universe.

**TRANSLATION**

But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material universes by His
entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lord here tells Arjuna that there
is no point in understanding how things exist in their separate opulence and
grandeur. He should know that all things are existing due to Kṛṣṇa’s entering
them as Supersoul. From Brahmā, the most gigantic entity, on down to the
smallest ant, all are existing because the Lord has entered each and all and is
sustaining them.

Worship of demigods is discouraged herein because even the greatest demigods
like Brahmā and Śiva only represent part of the opulence of the Supreme Lord. He
is the origin of everyone born, and no one is greater than Him. He is samatā,
which means that no one is superior to Him and that no one is equal to Him. In
the Viṣṇu-mantra it is said that one who considers the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa in the
same category with demigods—be they even Brahmā or Śiva—becomes at once an
atheist. If, however, one thoroughly studies the different descriptions of the
opulences and expansions of Kṛṣṇa’s energy, then one can understand without any
doubt the position of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and can fix his mind in the worship of
Kṛṣṇa without deviation. The Lord is all-pervading by the expansion of His
partial representation, the Supersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure
devotees, therefore, concentrate their minds in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in full
devotional service; therefore they are always situated in the transcendental
position. Devotional service and worship of Kṛṣṇa are very clearly indicated in
this chapter in verses eight to eleven. That is the way of pure devotional
service. How one can attain the highest devotional perfection of association
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in this
chapter.


The Universal Form

### 11.1


arjuna uvāca

mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ

guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitam

yat tvayoktaṁ vacas tena

moho ’yaṁ vigato mama

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; mat-anugrahāya—just to show me favor;
paramam—supreme; guhyam—confidential; adhyātma—spiritual; saṁjñitam—in the
matter of; yat—what; tvayā—by You; uktam—said; vacaḥ—words; tena—by that;
mohaḥ—illusion; ayam—this; vigataḥ—is educated; mama—my.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: I have heard Your instruction on confidential spiritual matters
which You have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion is now dispelled.

**PURPORT**

This chapter reveals Kṛṣṇa as the cause of all causes. He is even the cause of
the Mahā-Viṣṇu, and from Him the material universes emanate. Kṛṣṇa is not an
incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That has been completely
explained in the last chapter.

Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over. This
means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Kṛṣṇa as a mere human being, as a friend
of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very enlightened and is glad
that he has a great friend like Kṛṣṇa, but now he is thinking that although he
may accept Kṛṣṇa as the source of everything, others may not. So in order to
establish Kṛṣṇa’s divinity for all, he is requesting Kṛṣṇa in this chapter to
show His universal form. Actually when one sees the universal form of Kṛṣṇa one
becomes frightened, like Arjuna, but Kṛṣṇa is so kind that after showing it He
converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to what Kṛṣṇa says
several times. Kṛṣṇa is speaking to him just for his benefit, and Arjuna
acknowledges that all this is happening to him by Kṛṣṇa’s grace. He is now
convinced that Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes and is present in everyone’s
heart as the Supersoul.
