### 11.10-11


aneka-vaktra-nayanam

anekādbhuta-darśanam

aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ

divyānekodyatāyudham

divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ

divya-gandhānulepanam

sarvāścarya-mayaṁ devam

anantaṁ viśvato-mukham

aneka—various; vaktra—mouths; nayanam—eyes; aneka—various; adbhuta—wonderful;
darśanam—sight; aneka—many; divya—divine; ābharaṇam—ornaments; divya—divine;
aneka—various; udyata—uplifted; āyudham weapons; divya—divine; mālya—garlands;
ambara-dharam—covered with the dresses; divya—divine; gandha—fragrance;
anulepanam—smeared; sarva—all; aścaryamayam—wonderful; devam—shining;
anantam—unlimited; viśvataḥ-mukham—all-pervading.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes. It was
all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine, dazzling ornaments and arrayed
in many garbs. He was garlanded gloriously, and there were many scents smeared
over His body. All was magnificent, all-expanding, unlimited. This was seen by
Arjuna.

**PURPORT**

These two verses indicate that there is no limit to the hands, mouths, legs,
etc., of the Lord. These manifestations are distributed throughout the universe
and are unlimited. By the grace of the Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting
in one place. That is due to the inconceivable potency of Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.12


divi sūrya-sahasrasya

bhaved yugapad utthitā

yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād

bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ

divi—in the sky; sūrya—sun; sahasrasya—of many thousands; bhavet—there were;
yugapat—simultaneously; utthitā—present; yadi—if; bhāḥ—light; sadṛśī—like that;
sā—that; syāt—may be; bhāsaḥ—effulgence; tasya—there is; mahātmanaḥ—of the great
Lord.

**TRANSLATION**

If hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they might
resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal form.

**PURPORT**

What Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Sañjaya is trying to give a mental
picture of that great revelation to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Neither Sañjaya nor Dhṛtarāṣṭra
were present, but Sañjaya, by the grace of Vyāsa, could see whatever happened.
Thus he now compares the situation, as far as it can be understood, to an
imaginable phenomenon (i.e. thousands of suns).

### 11.13


tatraika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ

pravibhaktam anekadhā

apaśyad deva-devasya

śarīre pāṇḍavas tadā

tatra—there; ekastham—one place; jagat—universe; kṛtsnam—completely;
pravibhaktam—divided in; anekadhā—many kinds; apaśyat—could see; deva-devasya—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śarīre—in the universal form;
pāṇḍavaḥ—Arjuna; tadā—at that time.

**TRANSLATION**

At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the unlimited
expansions of the universe situated in one place although divided into many,
many thousands.

**PURPORT**

The word tatra (there) is very significant. It indicates that both Arjuna and
Kṛṣṇa were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw the universal form. Others on
the battlefield could not see this form because Kṛṣṇa gave the vision only to
Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the body of Kṛṣṇa many thousands of universes. As we
learn from Vedic scriptures, there are many universes and many planets. Some of
them are made of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels, some are
very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjuna could see
all these universes. But no one could understand what was going on between
Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.14


tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo

hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañjayaḥ

praṇamya śirasā devaṁ

kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata

tataḥ—thereafter; saḥ—he; vismayāviṣṭaḥ—being overwhelmed with wonder;
hṛṣṭa-romā—with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his great ecstasy;
dhanañjayaḥ—Arjuna ; praṇamya—offering obeisances; śirasā—with the head;
devam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛtāñjaliḥ—with folded hands;
abhāṣata—began to say.

**TRANSLATION**

Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began to pray
with folded hands, offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.

**PURPORT**

Once the divine vision is revealed, the relationship between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna
changes immediately. Before, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna had a relationship based on
friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offering obeisances with
great respect, and with folded hands he is praying to Kṛṣṇa. He is praising the
universal form. Thus Arjuna’s relationship becomes one of wonder rather than
friendship. Great devotees see Kṛṣṇa as the reservoir of all relationships. In
the scriptures there are twelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all
of them are present in Kṛṣṇa. It is said that He is the ocean of all the
relationships exchanged between two living entities, between the gods, or
between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.

It is said that Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, and in that
wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet, he became
ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer his obeisances unto the
Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, of course, afraid. He was affected
by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. The immediate context is wonder; his natural
loving friendship was overwhelmed by wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.

### 11.15


arjuna uvāca

paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehe

sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān

brahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham

ṛṣīṁś ca sarvān uragāṁś ca divyān

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; paśyāmi—I see; devān—all the demigods; tava—Your;
deva—O Lord; dehe—in the body; sarvān—all; tathā—also; bhūta—living entities;
viśeṣa-saṅghān—specifically assembled; brahmāṇam—Lord Brahmā; īśam—Lord Śiva;
kamala-āsana-stham—sitting on the lotus flower; ṛṣīn—great sages; ca—also;
sarvān—all; uragān—serpents; ca—also; divyān—divine.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, I see assembled together in Your body all the
demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahmā sitting on the lotus
flower as well as Lord Śiva and many sages and divine serpents.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahmā, who is the
first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent upon which the
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu lies in the lower regions of the universe. This snake bed
is called Vāsuki. There are also other snakes known as Vāsuki. Arjuna can see
from the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu up to the topmost part of the universe on the
lotus-flower planet where Brahmā, the first creature of the universe, resides.
That means that from the beginning to the end, everything could be seen by
Arjuna sitting in one place on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of
the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.16


aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ

paśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato ’nanta-rūpam

nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ

paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa

aneka—many; bāhū—arms; udara—bellies; vaktra—mouths; netram—eyes; paśyāmi—I see;
tvām—unto You; sarvataḥ—from all sides; ananta-rūpam—unlimited form; na
antam—there is no end; na madhyam—there is no middle; na punaḥ—nor again;
tava—Your; ādim—beginning; paśyāmi—I see; viśveśvara—O Lord of the universe;
viṣva-rūpa—in the form of the universe.

**TRANSLATION**

O Lord of the universe, I see in Your universal body many, many forms—bellies,
mouths, eyes—expanded without limit. There is no end, there is no beginning, and
there is no middle to all this.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus through Him
everything could be seen.

### 11.17


kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakriṇaṁ ca

tejo-rāśiṁ sarvato dīptimantam

paśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād

dīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam

kirīṭinam—with helmets; gadinam—with maces; cakriṇam—with discs; ca—and;
tejorāśim—effulgence; sarvataḥ—all sides; dīptimantam—glowing; pasyāmi—I see;
tvām—You; durnirīkṣyam—difficult to see; samantāt—spreading; dīpta-anala—blazing
fire; arka—sun; dyutim—sunshine; aprameyam—immeasurable.

**TRANSLATION**

Your form, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs, is difficult to see
because of its glaring effulgence, which is fiery and immeasurable like the sun.

### 11.18


tvam akṣaraṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁ

tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam

tvam avyayaḥ śāśvata-dharma-goptā

sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me

tvam—You; akṣaram—inexhaustible; paramam—supreme; veditavyam—to be understood;
tvam—You; asya—of this; viśvasya—of the universe; param—supreme; nidhānam—basis;
tvam—You are; avyayaḥ—inexhaustible; śāśvata-dharma-goptā—maintainer of the
eternal religion; sanātanaḥ—eternal; tvam—You; puruṣaḥ—Supreme Personality;
mataḥ me—is my opinion.

**TRANSLATION**

You are the supreme primal objective; You are the best in all the universes; You
are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest; You are the maintainer of religion,
the eternal Personality of Godhead.

### 11.19


anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryam

ananta-bāhuṁ śaśi-sūrya-netram

paśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ

sva-tejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam

anādi—without beginning; madhya—without middle; antam—without end;
ananta—unlimited; vīryam—glorious; ananta—unlimited; bāhum—arms; śaśi—moon;
sūrya—sun; netram—eyes; paśyāmi—I see; tvām—You; dīpta—blazing;
hutāśa-vaktram—fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasā—by Your; viśvam—this
universe; idam—this; tapantam—heating.

**TRANSLATION**

You are the origin without beginning, middle or end. You have numberless arms,
and the sun and moon are among Your great unlimited eyes. By Your own radiance
You are heating this entire universe.

**PURPORT**

There is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is repetition, but according to
the scriptures, repetition of the glories of Kṛṣṇa is not a literary weakness.
It is said that at a time of bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy,
statements are repeated over and over. That is not a flaw.
