
Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra

### 1.1


dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca

dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

kim akurvata sañjaya

dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ—King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; uvāca—said; dharma-kṣetre—in the place of
pilgrimage; kuru-kṣetre—in the place named Kurukṣetra; samavetāḥ—assembled;
yuyatsavaḥ—desiring to fight; māmakāḥ—my party (sons); pāṇḍavāḥ—the sons of
Pāṇḍu; ca—and; eva—certainly; kim—what; akurvata—did they do; sañjaya—O Sañjaya.

TRANSLATION

Dhṛtarāṣṭra said: O Sañjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at
Kurukṣetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pāṇḍu do, being desirous to fight?

PURPORT

Bhagavad-gītā is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gītā-māhātmya (Glorification of the Gītā). There it says that one should read
Bhagavad-gītā very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and try to understand it without personally motivated interpretations.
The example of clear understanding is there in the Bhagavad-gītā itself, in the
way the teaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gītā directly from the
Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand Bhagavad-gītā in that line of
disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all
studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures of the world. One will find in the
Bhagavad-gītā all that is contained in other scriptures, but the reader will
also find things which are not to be found elsewhere. That is the specific
standard of the Gītā. It is the perfect theistic science because it is directly
spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The topics discussed by Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Sañjaya, as described in the
Mahābhārata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It is
understood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, which
is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial time of the Vedic age. It
was spoken by the Lord when He was present personally on this planet for the
guidance of mankind.

The word dharma-kṣetra (a place where religious rituals are performed) is
significant because, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the father of the
Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of his sons’ ultimate victory.
In his doubt, he inquired from his secretary Sañjaya, “What did my sons and the
sons of Pāṇḍu do?” He was confident that both his sons and the sons of his
younger brother Pāṇḍu were assembled in that Field of Kurukṣetra for a
determined engagement of the war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not
want a compromise between the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of
the fate of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be
fought at Kurukṣetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as a place of
worship—even for the denizens of heaven—Dhṛtarāṣṭra became very fearful about
the influence of the holy place on the outcome of the battle. He knew very well
that this would influence Arjuna and the sons of Pāṇḍu favorably, because by
nature they were all virtuous. Sañjaya was a student of Vyāsa, and therefore, by
the mercy of Vyāsa, Sañjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra
even while he was in the room of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. And so, Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked him
about the situation on the battlefield.

Both the Pāṇḍavas and the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra belong to the same family, but
Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s mind is disclosed herein. He deliberately claimed only his sons as
Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pāṇḍu from the family heritage. One can thus
understand the specific position of Dhṛtarāṣṭra in his relationship with his
nephews, the sons of Pāṇḍu. As in the paddy field the unnecessary plants are
taken out, so it is expected from the very beginning of these topics that in the
religious field of Kurukṣetra where the father of religion, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, was
present, the unwanted plants like Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s son Duryodhana and others would
be wiped out and the thoroughly religious persons, headed by Yudhiṣṭhira, would
be established by the Lord. This is the significance of the words dharma-kṣetre
and kuru-kṣetre, apart from their historical and Vedic importance.

### 1.2


sañjaya uvāca

dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ

vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā

ācāryam upasaṅgamya

rājā vacanam abravīt

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; dṛṣṭvā—after seeing; tu—but; pāṇḍava-anīkam—the
soldiers of the Pāṇḍavas; vyūḍham—arranged in military phalanx; duryodhanaḥ—King
Duryodhana; tadā—at that time; ācāryam—the teacher; upasaṅgamya—approaching
nearby; rājā—the king; vacanam—words; abravīt—spoke.

TRANSLATION

Sañjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons of Pāṇḍu,
King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak the following words:

PURPORT

Dhṛtarāṣṭra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of spiritual
vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind in the matter of
religion, and he was sure that they could never reach an understanding with the
Pāṇḍavas, who were all pious since birth. Still he was doubtful about the
influence of the place of pilgrimage, and Sañjaya could understand his motive in
asking about the situation on the battlefield. He wanted, therefore, to
encourage the despondent King, and thus he warned him that his sons were not
going to make any sort of compromise under the influence of the holy place.
Sañjaya therefore informed the King that his son, Duryodhana, after seeing the
military force of the Pāṇḍavas, at once went to the commander-in-chief,
Droṇācārya, to inform him of the real position. Although Duryodhana is mentioned
as the king, he still had to go to the commander on account of the seriousness
of the situation. He was therefore quite fit to be a politician. But
Duryodhana’s diplomatic veneer could not disguise the fear he felt when he saw
the military arrangement of the Pāṇḍavas.

### 1.3


paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām

ācārya mahatīṁ camūm

vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa

tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

paśya—behold; etām—this; pāṇḍu-putrāṇām—of the sons of Pāṇḍu; ācārya—O teacher;
mahatīm—great; camūm—military force; vyuḍham—arranged; drupada-putreṇa—by the
son of Drupada; tava—your; śiṣyeṇa—disciple; dhīmatā—very intelligent.

TRANSLATION

O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pāṇḍu, so expertly arranged
by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of Droṇācārya, the
great brāhmaṇa commander-in-chief. Droṇācārya had some political quarrel with
King Drupada, the father of Draupadī, who was Arjuna’s wife. As a result of this
quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which he received the
benediction of having a son who would be able to kill Droṇācārya. Droṇācārya
knew this perfectly well, and yet, as a liberal brāhmaṇa, he did not hesitate to
impart all his military secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, was
entrusted to him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra,
Dhṛṣṭadyumna took the side of the Pāṇḍavas, and it was he who arranged for their
military phalanx, after having learned the art from Droṇācārya. Duryodhana
pointed out this mistake of Droṇācārya’s so that he might be alert and
uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted to point out also that he
should not be similarly lenient in battle against the Pāṇḍavas, who were also
Droṇācārya’s affectionate students. Arjuna, especially, was his most
affectionate and brilliant student. Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in
the fight would lead to defeat.

### 1.4


atra śūrā maheṣv-āsā

bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi

yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca

drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

atra—here; śūrāḥ—heroes; maheṣvāsāḥ—mighty bowmen; bhīma-arjuna—Bhīma and
Arjuna; samāḥ—equal; yudhi—in the fight; yuyudhānaḥ—Yuyudhāna; virāṭaḥ—Virāṭa;
ca—also; drupadaḥ—Drupada; ca—also; mahārathaḥ—great fighter.

TRANSLATION

Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhīma and
Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhāna, Virāṭa and Drupada.

PURPORT

Even though Dhṛṣṭadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face of
Droṇācārya’s very great power in the military art, there were many others who
were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana as great stumbling
blocks on the path of victory because each and every one of them was as
formidable as Bhīma and Arjuna. He knew the strength of Bhīma and Arjuna, and
thus he compared the others with them.

### 1.5


dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ

kāśirājaś ca vīryavān

purujit kuntibhojaś ca

śaibyaś ca nara-puṅgavaḥ

dhṛṣṭaketuḥ—Dhṛṣṭaketu; cekitānaḥ—Cekitāna; kāśirājaḥ—Kaśirāja; ca—also;
vīryavān—very powerful; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojaḥ—Kuntibhoja; ca—and;
śaibyaḥ—Śaibya; ca—and; nara-puṅgavaḥ—heroes in human society.

TRANSLATION

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhṛṣṭaketu, Cekitāna,
Kāśirāja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Śaibya.

### 1.6


yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta

uttamaujāś ca vīryavān

saubhadro draupadeyāś ca

sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

yudhāmanyuḥ—Yudhāmanyu; ca—and; vikrāntaḥ—mighty; uttamaujāḥ—Uttamaujā; ca—and;
vīryavān—very powerful; saubhadraḥ—the son of Subhadrā; draupadeyāḥ—the sons of
Draupadī; ca—and; sarve—all; eva—certainly; mahā-rathāḥ—great chariot fighters.

TRANSLATION

There are the mighty Yudhāmanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujā, the son of
Subhadrā and the sons of Draupadī. All these warriors are great chariot
fighters.

### 1.7


asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye

tān nibodha dvijottama

nāyakā mama sainyasya

saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te

asmākam—our; tu—but; viśiṣṭāḥ—especially powerful; ye—those; tān—them;
nibodha—just take note, be informed; dvijottama—the best of the brāhmaṇas;
nāyakāḥ—captains; mama—my; sainyasya—of the soldiers; saṁjñā-artham—for
information; tān—them; bravīmi—I am speaking; te—your.

TRANSLATION

O best of the brāhmaṇas, for your information, let me tell you about the
captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

### 1.8


bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca

kṛpaś ca samitiṁ-jayaḥ

aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca

saumadattis tathaiva ca

bhavān—yourself; bhīṣmaḥ—Grandfather Bhīṣma; ca—also; karṇaḥ—Karṇa; ca—and;
kṛpaḥ—Kṛpa; ca—and; samitiñjayaḥ—always victorious in battle;
aśvatthāmā—Aśvatthāmā; vikarṇaḥ—Vikarṇa; ca—as well as; saumadattiḥ—the son of
Somadatta; tathā—and as; eva—certainly; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

There are personalities like yourself, Bhīṣma, Karṇa, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāmā, Vikarṇa
and the son of Somadatta called Bhuriśravā, who are always victorious in battle.

PURPORT

Duryodhana mentioned the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom are
ever-victorious. Vikarṇa is the brother of Duryodhana, Aśvatthāmā is the son of
Droṇācārya, and Saumadatti, or Bhūriśravā, is the son of the King of the
Bāhlīkas. Karṇa is the half brother of Arjuna, as he was born of Kuntī before
her marriage with King Pāṇḍu. Kṛpācārya married the twin sister of Droṇācārya.
