TRANSLATION

There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my
sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are
experienced in military science.

PURPORT

As far as the others are concerned—like Jayadratha, Kṛtavarmā, Śalya, etc.—all
are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana’s sake. In other words, it
is already concluded that all of them would die in the Battle of Kurukṣetra for
joining the party of the sinful Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of course, confident
of his victory on account of the above-mentioned combined strength of his
friends.

### 1.10


aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ

balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam

paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ

balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam

aparyāptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asmākam—of ours; balam—strength; bhīṣma—by
Grandfather Bhīṣma; abhirakṣitam—perfectly protected; paryāptam—limited; tu—but;
idam—all these; eteṣām—of the Pāṇḍavas; balam—strength; bhīma—by Bhīma;
abhirakṣitam—carefully protected.

TRANSLATION

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather
Bhīṣma, whereas the strength of the Pāṇḍavas, carefully protected by Bhīma, is
limited.

PURPORT

Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He thinks
that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being specifically
protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather Bhīṣma. On the other
hand, the forces of the Pāṇḍavas are limited, being protected by a less
experienced general, Bhīma, who is like a fig in the presence of Bhīṣma.
Duryodhana was always envious of Bhīma because he knew perfectly well that if he
should die at all, he would only be killed by Bhīma. But at the same time, he
was confident of his victory on account of the presence of Bhīṣma, who was a far
superior general. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle victorious
was well ascertained.

### 1.11


ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu

yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ

bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu

bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

ayaneṣu—in the strategic points; ca—also; sarveṣu—everywhere; yathābhāgam—as
they are differently arranged; avasthitāḥ—situated; bhīṣmam—unto Grandfather
Bhīṣma; eva—certainly; abhirakṣantu—support may be given; bhavantaḥ—all of you;
sarve—respectively; eva—certainly; hi—and exactly.

TRANSLATION

Now all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhīṣma, standing at your
respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhīṣma, further considered that others
might think that they had been considered less important, so in his usual
diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in the above words. He
emphasized that Bhīṣmadeva was undoubtedly the greatest hero, but he was an old
man, so everyone must especially think of his protection from all sides. He
might become engaged in the fight, and the enemy might take advantage of his
full engagement on one side. Therefore, it was important that other heroes would
not leave their strategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.
Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on the presence
of Bhīṣmadeva. He was confident of the full support of Bhīṣmadeva and Droṇācārya
in the battle because he well knew that they did not even speak a word when
Arjuna’s wife Draupadī, in her helpless condition, had appealed to them for
justice while she was being forced to strip naked in the presence of all the
great generals in the assembly. Although he knew that the two generals had some
sort of affection for the Pāṇḍavas, he hoped that all such affection would now
be completely given up by them, as was customary during the gambling
performances.

### 1.12


tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ

kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ

siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ

śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

tasya—his; sañjanayan—increasing; harṣam—cheerfulness; kuru-vṛddhaḥ—the
grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhīṣma); pitāmahaḥ—the grandfather;
siṁha-nādam—roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya—vibrating; uccaiḥ—very loudly;
śaṅkham—conchshell; dadhmau—blew; pratāpavān—the valiant.

TRANSLATION

Then Bhīṣma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of
the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly like the sound of a lion, giving
Duryodhana joy.

PURPORT

The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of the
heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion for him he
tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly, befitting his position
as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the conchshell, he informed his
depressed grandson Duryodhana that he had no chance of victory in the battle,
because the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the other side. But still, it was his duty
to conduct the fight, and no pains would be spared in that connection.

### 1.13


tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca

paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ

sahasaivābhyahanyanta

sa śabdas tumulo ’bhavat

tataḥ—thereafter; śaṅkhāḥ—conchshells; ca—also; bheryaḥ—bugles; ca—and;
paṇava-ānaka—trumpets and drums; go-mukhāḥ—horns; sahasā—all of a sudden;
eva—certainly; abhyahanyanta—being simultaneously sounded; saḥ—that;
śabdaḥ—combined sound; tumulaḥ—tumultuous; abhavat—became.

TRANSLATION

After that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all suddenly
sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

### 1.14


tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte

mahati syandane sthitau

mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś caiva

divyau śaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ

tataḥ—thereafter; śvetaiḥ—by white; hayaiḥ—horses; yukte—being yoked with;
mahati—in the great; syandane—chariot; sthitau—so situated; mādhavaḥ—Kṛṣṇa (the
husband of the goddess of fortune); pāṇḍavaḥ—Arjuna (the son of Pāṇḍu); ca—also;
eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental; śaṅkhau—conchshells; pradadhmatuḥ—sounded.

TRANSLATION

On the other side, both Lord Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot
drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.

PURPORT

In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhīṣmadeva, the conchshells in the
hands of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The sounding of the
transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of victory for the
other side because Kṛṣṇa was on the side of the Pāṇḍavas. Jayas tu
pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ yeṣāṁ pakṣe janārdanaḥ. Victory is always with persons like the
sons of Pāṇḍu because Lord Kṛṣṇa is associated with them. And whenever and
wherever the Lord is present, the goddess of fortune is also there because the
goddess of fortune never lives alone without her husband. Therefore, victory and
fortune were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental sound produced
by the conchshell of Viṣṇu, or Lord Kṛṣṇa. Besides that, the chariot on which
both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the fire-god) to Arjuna, and
this indicated that this chariot was capable of conquering all sides, wherever
it was drawn over the three worlds.

### 1.15


pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo

devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ

pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ

bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

pāñcajanyam—the conchshell named Pāñcajanya; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Hṛṣīkeśa (Kṛṣṇa, the Lord
who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the conchshell named
Devadatta; dhanañjayaḥ—Dhanañjaya (Arjuna, the winner of wealth); pauṇḍram—the
conch named Pauṇḍram; dadhmau—blew; mahā-śaṅkham—the terrific conchshell;
bhīma-karmā—one who performs Herculean tasks; vṛkodaraḥ—the voracious eater
(Bhīma).

TRANSLATION

Then, Lord Kṛṣṇa blew His conchshell, called Pāñcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the
Devadatta; and Bhīma, the voracious eater and performer of Herculean tasks, blew
his terrific conchshell called Pauṇḍram.

PURPORT

Lord Kṛṣṇa is referred to as Hṛṣīkeśa in this verse because He is the owner of
all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and, therefore, the
senses of the living entities are also part and parcel of His senses. The
impersonalists cannot account for the senses of the living entities, and
therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as sense-less,
or impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs
their senses. But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity,
and in the case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the
Battlefield of Kurukṣetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses
of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hṛṣīkeśa. The Lord has different
names according to His different activities. For example, His name is
Madhusūdana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu; His name is Govinda
because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Vāsudeva
because He appeared as the son of Vasudeva; His name is Devakī-nandana because
He accepted Devakī as His mother; His name is Yaśodā-nandana because He awarded
His childhood pastimes to Yaśodā at Vṛndāvana; His name is Pārtha-sārathi
because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is
Hṛṣīkeśa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra.

Arjuna is referred to as Dhanañjaya in this verse because he helped his elder
brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the King to make expenditures
for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhīma is known as Vṛkodara because he could
eat as voraciously as he could perform Herculean tasks, such as killing the
demon Hiḍimba. So, the particular types of conchshell blown by the different
personalities on the side of the Pāṇḍavas, beginning with the Lord’s, were all
very encouraging to the fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such
credits, nor the presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme director, nor that of the
goddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose the battle—and that was
the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.

### 1.16-18


anantavijayaṁ rājā

kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ

nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca

sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau

kāśyaś ca parameṣv-āsaḥ

śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ

dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca

sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

drupado draupadeyāś ca

sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-pate

saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ

śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak

TRANSLATION

King Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuntī, blew his conchshell, the Anantavijaya, and
Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka. That great archer the King
of Kāśī, the great fighter Śikhaṇḍī, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Virāṭa and the unconquerable
Sātyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadī, and the others, O King, such as the son
of Subhadrā, greatly armed, all blew their respective conchshells.

PURPORT

Sañjaya informed King Dhṛtarāṣṭra very tactfully that his unwise policy of
deceiving the sons of Pāṇḍu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons on the seat
of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already clearly indicated that
the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in that great battle. Beginning with the
grandsire, Bhīṣma, down to the grandsons like Abhimanyu and others—including
kings from many states of the world—all were present there, and all were doomed.
The whole catastrophe was due to King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, because he encouraged the
policy followed by his sons.

### 1.19


sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ

hṛdayāni vyadārayat

nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva

tumulo ’bhyanunādayan

saḥ—that; ghoṣaḥ—vibration; dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām—of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
hṛdayāni—hearts; vyadārayat—shattered; nabhaḥ—the sky; ca—also; pṛthivīm—the
surface of the earth; ca—also; eva—certainly; tumulaḥ—uproarious; abhyanunādayan—by resounding.
