### 1.19


sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ

hṛdayāni vyadārayat

nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva

tumulo ’bhyanunādayan

saḥ—that; ghoṣaḥ—vibration; dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām—of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
hṛdayāni—hearts; vyadārayat—shattered; nabhaḥ—the sky; ca—also; pṛthivīm—the
surface of the earth; ca—also; eva—certainly; tumulaḥ—uproarious; abhyanunādayan—by resounding.

TRANSLATION

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons
of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

PURPORT

When Bhīṣma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their respective
conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of the Pāṇḍavas. Such
occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular verse it is mentioned that
the hearts of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were shattered by the sounds vibrated by
the Pāṇḍavas’ party. This is due to the Pāṇḍavas and their confidence in Lord
Kṛṣṇa. One who takes shelter of the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in
the midst of the greatest calamity.

### 1.20


atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā

dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥ

pravṛtte śastra-sampāte

dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam

idam āha mahī-pate

atha—thereupon; vyavasthitān—situated; dṛṣṭvā—looking on; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons
of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; kapi-dhvajaḥ—one whose flag is marked with Hanumān;
pravṛtte—while about to be engaged; śastra-sampāte—the arrows released;
dhanuḥ—bow; udyamya—after taking up; pāṇḍavaḥ—the son of Pāṇḍu (Arjuna);
hṛṣīkeśam—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; tadā—at that time; vākyam—words; idam—these;
āha—said; mahī-pate—O King.

TRANSLATION

O King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Pāṇḍu, who was seated in his chariot,
his flag marked with Hanumān, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows,
looking at the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. O King, Arjuna then spoke to Hṛṣīkeśa
[Kṛṣṇa] these words:

PURPORT

The battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above statement
that the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were more or less disheartened by the unexpected
arrangement of military force by the Pāṇḍavas, who were guided by the direct
instructions of Lord Kṛṣṇa on the battlefield. The emblem of Hanumān on the flag
of Arjuna is another sign of victory because Hanumān cooperated with Lord Rāma
in the battle between Rāma and Rāvaṇa, and Lord Rāma emerged victorious. Now
both Rāma and Hanumān were present on the chariot of Arjuna to help him. Lord
Kṛṣṇa is Rāma Himself, and wherever Lord Rāma is, His eternal servitor Hanumān
and His eternal consort Sītā, the goddess of fortune, are present. Therefore,
Arjuna had no cause to fear any enemies whatsoever. And above all, the Lord of
the senses, Lord Kṛṣṇa, was personally present to give him direction. Thus, all
good counsel was available to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In
such auspicious conditions, arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee, lay
the signs of assured victory.

### 1.21-22


arjuna uvāca

senayor ubhayor madhye

rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta

yāvad etān nirīkṣe ’haṁ

yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān

kair mayā saha yoddhavyam

asmin raṇa-samudyame

arjunaḥ—Arjuna; uvāca—said; senayoḥ—of the armies; ubhayoḥ—of both the parties;
madhye—in between them; ratham—the chariot; sthāpaya—please keep; me—my;
acyuta—O infallible one; yāvat—as long as; etān—all these; nirīkṣe—may look;
aham—I; yoddhu-kāmān—desiring to fight; avasthitān—arrayed on the battlefield;
kaiḥ—with whom; mayā—by me; saha—with; yoddhavyam—to fight with; asmin—in this;
raṇa—strife; samudyame—in the attempt.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so
that I may see who is present here, who is desirous of fighting, and with whom I
must contend in this great battle attempt.

PURPORT

Although Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His causeless
mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never fails in His
affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed herein as infallible. As
charioteer, He had to carry out the orders of Arjuna, and since He did not
hesitate to do so, He is addressed as infallible. Although He had accepted the
position of a charioteer for His devotee, His supreme position was not
challenged. In all circumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and
His servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready to
render a service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is always seeking an
opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes greater pleasure in
His pure devotee’s assuming the advantageous postion of ordering Him than He
does in being the giver of orders. As master, everyone is under His orders, and
no one is above Him to order Him. But when he finds that a pure devotee is
ordering Him, He obtains transcendental pleasure, although He is the infallible
master of all circumstances.

As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with his cousins
and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield by the obstinacy of
Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peaceful negotiation. Therefore, he
was very anxious to see who the leading persons present on the battlefield were.
Although there was no question of a peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he
wanted to see them again, and to see how much they were bent upon demanding an
unwanted war.


### 1.23


yotsyamānān avekṣe ’haṁ

ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher

yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

yotsyamānān—those who will be fighting; avekṣe—let me see; aham—I; ye—who;
ete—those; atra—here; samāgatāḥ—assembled; dhārtarāṣṭrasya—the son of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra; durbuddheḥ—evil-minded; yuddhe—in the fight; priya—well;
cikīrṣavaḥ—wishing.

TRANSLATION

Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded
son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

PURPORT

It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of the
Pāṇḍavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father, Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of Duryodhana must have been
birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to see them in the battlefield before
the fight was begun, just to learn who they were, but he had no intention of
proposing peace negotiations with them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see
them to make an estimate of the strength which he had to face, although he was
quite confident of victory because Kṛṣṇa was sitting by his side.

### 1.24


sañjaya uvāca

evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo

guḍākeśena bhārata

senayor ubhayor madhye

sthāpayitvā rathottamam

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; evam—thus; uktaḥ—addressed; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
guḍākeśena—by Arjuna; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata; senayoḥ—of armies;
ubhayoḥ—of both; madhye—in the midst of; sthāpayitvā—by placing; rathottamam—the
finest chariot.

TRANSLATION

Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna, Lord
Kṛṣṇa drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.

PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Guḍākeśa. Guḍāka means sleep, and one who
conquers sleep is called guḍākeśa. Sleep also means ignorance. So Arjuna
conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his friendship with Kṛṣṇa. As a
great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he could not forget Kṛṣṇa even for a moment, because
that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the
Lord can never be free from thinking of Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, quality and
pastimes. Thus a devotee of Kṛṣṇa can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply by
thinking of Kṛṣṇa constantly. This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or samādhi. As
Hṛṣīkeśa, or the director of the senses and mind of every living entity, Kṛṣṇa
could understand Arjuna’s purpose in placing the chariot in the midst of the
armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.

### 1.25


bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ

sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām

uvāca pārtha paśyaitān

samavetān kurūn iti

bhīṣma—Grandfather Bhīṣma; droṇa—the teacher Droṇa; pramukhataḥ—in the front of;
sarveṣām—all; ca—also; mahīkṣitām—chiefs of the world; uvāca—said; pārtha—O
Pārtha (son of Pṛthā); paśya—just behold; etān—all of them; samavetān—assembled;
kurūn—all the members of the Kuru dynasty; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

In the presence of Bhīṣma, Droṇa and all other chieftains of the world,
Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord, said, Just behold, Pārtha, all the Kurus who are assembled
here.

PURPORT

As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Kṛṣṇa could understand what was
going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hṛṣīkeśa in this connection
indicates that He knew everything. And the word Pārtha, or the son of Kuntī or
Pṛthā, is also similarly significant in reference to Arjuna. As a friend, He
wanted to inform Arjuna that because Arjuna was the son of Pṛthā, the sister of
His own father Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of Arjuna. Now what
did Kṛṣṇa mean when He told Arjuna to “behold the Kurus”? Did Arjuna want to
stop there and not fight? Kṛṣṇa never expected such things from the son of His
aunt Pṛthā. The mind of Arjuna was thus predicated by the Lord in friendly
joking.

### 1.26


tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ

pitṝn atha pitāmahān

ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn

putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā

śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva

senayor ubhayor api

tatra—there; apaśyat—he could see; sthitān—standing; pārthaḥ—Arjuna;
pitṝn—fathers; atha—also; pitāmahān—grandfathers; ācāryān—teachers;
mātulān—maternal uncles; bhrātṝn—brothers; putrān—sons ; pautrān—grandsons;
sakhīn—friends; tathā—too, śvaśurān—fathers-in-law; suhṛdaḥ—wellwishers;
ca—also; eva—certainly; senayoḥ—of the armies; ubhayoḥ—of both parties;
api—including.

TRANSLATION

There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his
fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons,
friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers—all present there.

PURPORT

On the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could see persons
like Bhūriśravā, who were his father’s contemporaries, grandfathers Bhīṣma and
Somadatta, teachers like Droṇācārya and Kṛpācārya, maternal uncles like Śalya
and Śakuni, brothers like Duryodhana, sons like Lakṣmaṇa, friends like
Aśvatthāmā, well-wishers like Kṛtavarmā, etc. He could see also the armies which
contained many of his friends.

### 1.27


tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ

sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo

viṣīdann idam abravīt

tān—all of them; samīkṣya—after seeing; saḥ—he; kaunteyaḥ—the son of Kuntī;
sarvān—all kinds of; bandhūn—relatives; avasthitān—situated; kṛpayā—by
compassion; parayā—of a high grade; āviṣṭaḥ—overwhelmed by; viṣīdan—while
lamenting; idam—thus; abravīt—spoke.

TRANSLATION

When the son of Kuntī, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and
relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus:
