TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Kṛṣṇa, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in
such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth
drying up.

PURPORT

Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities which
are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the nondevotee, however
advanced he may be in material qualifications by education and culture, lacks in
godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen, friends and
relatives on the battlefield, was at once overwhelmed by compassion for them who
had so decided to fight amongst themselves. As far as his soldiers were
concerned, he was sympathetic from the beginning, but he felt compassion even
for the soldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their imminent death. And so
thinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and his mouth became dry. He
was more or less astonished to see their fighting spirit. Practically the whole
community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, had come to fight with him. This
overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna. Although it is not mentioned here, still
one can easily imagine that not only were Arjuna’s bodily limbs quivering and
his mouth drying up, but that he was also crying out of compassion. Such
symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a
characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said therefore:

yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ harāv
abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā mano-rathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ

“One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all the
good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord has
only material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is
hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring
material energy.” (Bhāg. 5.18.12)

### 1.29


vepathuś ca śarīre me

roma-harṣaś ca jāyate

gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt

tvak caiva paridahyate

vepathuḥ—trembling of the body; ca—also; śarīre—on the body; me—my;
roma-harṣaḥ—standing of hair on end; ca—also; jāyate—is taking place;
gāṇḍīvam—the bow of Arjuna; sraṁsate—is slipping; hastāt—from the hands;
tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—burning.

TRANSLATION

My whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow Gāṇḍīva is
slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.

PURPORT

There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of standings of the
hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great spiritual ecstasy or out of
great fear under material conditions. There is no fear in transcendental
realization. Arjuna’s symptoms in this situation are out of material
fear—namely, loss of life. This is evident from other symptoms also; he became
so impatient that his famous bow Gāṇḍīva was slipping from his hands, and,
because his heart was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation of
the skin. All these are due to a material conception of life.

### 1.30


na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ

bhramatīva ca me manaḥ

nimittāni ca paśyāmi

viparītāni keśava

na—nor; ca—also; śaknomi—am I able; avasthātum—to stay; bhramati—forgetting;
iva—as; ca—and; me—my; manaḥ—mind; nimittāni—causes; ca—also; paśyāmi—I foresee;
viparītāni—just the opposite; keśava—O killer of the demon Keśī (Kṛṣṇa).

TRANSLATION

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my mind is
reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Keśī demon.

PURPORT

Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield, and he was
forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind. Excessive attachment
for material things puts a man in a bewildering condition of existence. Bhayaṁ
dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ: such fearfulness and loss of mental equilibrium take place
in persons who are too affected by material conditions. Arjuna envisioned only
unhappiness in the battlefield—he would not be happy even by gaining victory
over the foe. The word nimitta is significant. When a man sees only frustration
in his expectations, he thinks, “Why am I here?” Everyone is interested in
himself and his own welfare. No one is interested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is
supposed to show disregard for self-interest by submission to the will of Kṛṣṇa,
who is everyone’s real self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and
therefore suffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle
would only be a cause of lamentation for him.

### 1.31


na ca śreyo ’nupaśyāmi

hatvā sva-janam āhave

na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa

na ca rājyaṁ sukhāni ca

na—nor; ca—also; śreyaḥ—good; anupaśyāmi—do I foresee; hatvā—by killing;
svajanam—own kinsmen; āhave—in the fight; na—nor; kānkṣe—do I desire;
vijayam—victory; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; na—nor; ca—also; rājyam—kingdom;
sukhāni—happiness thereof; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle,
nor can I, my dear Kṛṣṇa, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or happiness.

PURPORT

Without knowing that one’s self-interest is in Viṣṇu (or Kṛṣṇa), conditioned
souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in such
situations. Under delusion, they forget that Kṛṣṇa is also the cause of material
happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes for a kṣatriya.
It is said that two kinds of men, namely the kṣatriya who dies directly in front
of the battlefield under Kṛṣṇa’s personal orders and the person in the renounced
order of life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible to
enter into the sun-globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna is reluctant
even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thought that by killing
his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and therefore he was not
willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is not inclined to
cook. He has now decided to go into the forest and live a secluded life in
frustration. But as a kṣatriya, he requires a kingdom for his subsistence,
because the kṣatriyas cannot engage themselves in any other occupation. But
Arjuna has had no kingdom. Arjuna’s sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lay
in fighting with his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited
from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himself
fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.

### 1.32-35


kiṁ no rājyena govinda

kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā

yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no

rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca

ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe

prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca

ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās

tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ

mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ

śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

etān na hantum icchāmi

ghnato ’pi madhusūdana

api trailokya-rājyasya

hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛte

nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ

kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana

kim—what use; naḥ—to us; rājyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O Kṛṣṇa; kim—what;
bhogaiḥ—enjoyment; jīvitena—by living; vā—either; yeṣām—for whom; arthe—for the
matter of; kāṅkṣitam—desired; naḥ—our; rājyam—kingdom; bhogāḥ—material
enjoyment; sukhāni—all happiness; ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these;
avasthitāḥ—situated; yuddhe—in this battlefield; prāṇān—lives; tyaktvā—giving
up; dhanāni—riches; ca—also; ācāryāḥ—teachers; pitaraḥ—fathers; putrāḥ—sons;
tathā—as well as; eva—certainly; ca—also; pitāmahāḥ—grandfathers;
mātulāḥ—maternal uncles; śvaśurāḥ—fathers-in-law; pautrāḥ—grandsons;
śyālāḥ—brothers-in-law; sambandhinaḥ—relatives; tathā—as well as; etān—all
these; na—never; hantum—for killing; icchāmi—do I wish; ghnataḥ—being killed;
api—even; madhusūdana—O killer of the demon Madhu (Kṛṣṇa); api—even if;
trailokya—of the three worlds; rājyasya—of the kingdoms; hetoḥ—in exchange;
kim—what to speak of; nu—only; mahī-kṛte—for the sake of earth; nihatya—by
killing; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; naḥ—our; kā—what;
prītiḥ—pleasure; syāt—will there be; janārdana—O maintainer of all living
entities.

TRANSLATION

O Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life itself when
all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed in this battlefield? O
Madhusūdana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives are ready to give
up their lives and properties and are standing before me, then why should I wish
to kill them, though I may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not
prepared to fight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone
this earth.

PURPORT

Arjuna has addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa as Govinda because Kṛṣṇa is the object of all
pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna
indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govinda is not meant for
satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the senses of Govinda then
automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially, everyone wants to
satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier for such
satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as much as
they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one takes the
opposite way—namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without
desiring to satisfy one’s own senses—then by the grace of Govinda all desires of
the living entity are satisfied. Arjuna’s deep affection for community and
family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion for them.
He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show his opulence to
friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his relatives and friends will
be killed in the battlefield, and he will be unable to share his opulence after
victory. This is a typical calculation of material life. The transcendental life
is, however, different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the
Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the
Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing. Arjuna
did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need to kill them, he
desired that Kṛṣṇa kill them personally. At this point he did not know that
Kṛṣṇa had already killed them before their coming into the battlefield and that
he was only to become an instrument for Kṛṣṇa. This fact is disclosed in
following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to
retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord’s plan
that they should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate
against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done to the
devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His own account, but
He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees. Therefore the Lord was
determined to kill the miscreants, although Arjuna wanted to excuse them.

### 1.36


pāpam evāśrayed asmān

hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ

tasmān nārhā vayaṁ hantuṁ

dhārtarāṣṭrān sa-bāndhavān

sva-janaṁ hi kathaṁ hatvā

sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava

pāpam—vices; eva—certainly; āśrayet—must take upon; asmān—us; hatvā—by killing;
etān—all these; ātatāyinaḥ—aggressors; tasmāt—therefore; na—never;
arhāḥ—deserving; vayam—us; hantum—to kill; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra; svabāndhavān—along with friends; svajanam—kinsmen; hi—certainly;
katham—how; hatvā—by killing; sukhinaḥ—happy; syāma—become; mādhava—O Kṛṣṇa,
husband of the goddess of fortune.

TRANSLATION

Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for
us to kill the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and our friends. What should we gain, O
Kṛṣṇa, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing
our own kinsmen?

PURPORT

According to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a poison
giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attacks with deadly
weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupies another’s land, and 6)
one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at once to be killed, and no sin is
incurred by killing such aggressors. Such killing of aggressors is quite
befitting for any ordinary man, but Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He was
saintly by character, and therefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness.
This kind of saintliness, however, is not for a kṣatriya. Although a responsible
man in the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he should not be
cowardly. For example, Lord Rāma was so saintly that people were anxious to live
in His kingdom, (Rāma-rājya), but Lord Rāma never showed any cowardice. Rāvaṇa
was an aggressor against Rāma because he kidnapped Rāma’s wife, Sītā, but Lord
Rāma gave him sufficient lessons, unparalleled in the history of the world. In
Arjuna’s case, however, one should consider the special type of aggressors,
namely his own grandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because
of them, Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessary
against ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advised to
forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more important than any
political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than kill his own kinsmen for
political reasons, it would be better to forgive them on grounds of religion and
