### 1.46


sañjaya uvāca

evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye

rathopastha upāviśat

visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ

śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; evam—thus; uktvā—saying; arjunaḥ—Arjuna;
saṅkhye—in the battlefield; ratha—chariot; upasthaḥ—situated on; upāviśat—sat
down again; visṛjya—keeping aside; sa-śaram—along with arrows; cāpam—the bow;
śoka—lamentation; saṁvigna—distressed; mānasaḥ—within the mind.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow
and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.

**PURPORT**

While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the chariot, but
he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down again, setting aside his
bow and arrows. Such a kind and softhearted person, in the devotional service of
the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra.

Contents of the Gītā Summarized

### 2.1


sañjaya uvāca

taṁ tathā kṛpayāviṣṭam

aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam

viṣīdantam idaṁ vākyam

uvāca madhusūdanaḥ

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; tam—unto Arjuna; tathā—thus; kṛpayā—by compassion;
āviṣṭam—overwhelmed; aśru-pūrṇa—full of tears; ākula—depressed; īkṣaṇam—eyes;
viṣīdantam—lamenting; idam—this; vākyam—words; uvāca—said; madhusūdanaḥ—the
killer of Madhu.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his eyes
brimming with tears, Madhusūdana, Kṛṣṇa, spoke the following words.

**PURPORT**

Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance of the
real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization. The word
“Madhusūdana” is significant in this verse. Lord Kṛṣṇa killed the demon Madhu,
and now Arjuna wanted Kṛṣṇa to kill the demon of misunderstanding that had
overtaken him in the discharge of his duty. No one knows where compassion should
be applied. Compassion for the dress of a drowning man is senseless. A man
fallen in the ocean of nescience cannot be saved simply by rescuing his outward
dress—the gross material body. One who does not know this and laments for the
outward dress is called a śūdra, or one who laments unnecessarily. Arjuna was a
kṣatriya, and this conduct was not expected from him. Lord Kṛṣṇa, however, can
dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man, and for this purpose the
Bhagavad-gītā was sung by Him. This chapter instructs us in self-realization by
an analytical study of the material body and the spirit soul, as explained by
the supreme authority, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This realization is made possible by
working with the fruitive being situated in the fixed conception of the real
self.

### 2.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ

viṣame samupasthitam

anārya-juṣṭam asvargyam

akīrti-karam arjuna

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutaḥ—wherefrom;
tvā—unto you; kaśmalam—dirtiness; idam—this lamentation; viṣame—this hour of
crisis; samupasthitam—arrived; anārya—persons who do not know the value of life;
juṣṭam—practiced by; asvargyam—that which does not lead to higher planets;
akīrti—infamy; karam—the cause of; arjuna—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Person [Bhagavān] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities
come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows the progressive
values of life. They do not lead to higher planets, but to infamy.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa
is referred to as “Bhagavān” throughout the Gītā. Bhagavān is the ultimate in
the Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding,
namely Brahman or the impersonal all-pervasive spirit; Paramātmā, or the
localized aspect of the Supreme within the heart of all living entities; and
Bhagavān, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa. In the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained thus:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam brahmeti paramātmeti
bhagavān iti śabdyate.

“The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the knower
of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Such phases of the
Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān.” (Bhāg.
1.2.11) These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun’s surface
and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is the preliminary
student. One who understands the sun’s surface is further advanced. And one who
can enter into the sun planet is the highest. Ordinary students who are
satisfied by simply understanding the sunshine—its universal pervasiveness and
the glaring effulgence of its impersonal nature—may be compared to those who can
realize only the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student who has
advanced still further can know the sun disc, which is compared to knowledge of
the Paramātmā feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student who can enter into
the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realize the personal
features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, the bhaktas, or the
transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavān feature of the Absolute Truth,
are the topmost transcendentalists, although all students who are engaged in the
study of the Absolute Truth are engaged in the same subject matter. The
sunshine, the sun disc and the inner affairs of the sun planet cannot be
separated from one another, and yet the students of the three different phases
are not in the same category.

The Sanskrit word Bhagavān is explained by the great authority, Parāśara Muni,
the father of Vyāsadeva. The Supreme Personality who possesses all riches, all
strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation is called
Bhagavān. There are many persons who are very rich, very powerful, very
beautiful, very famous, very learned, and very much detached, but no one can
claim that he possesses all riches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Kṛṣṇa can
claim this because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living entity,
including Brahmā, Lord Śiva, or Nārāyaṇa, can possess opulences as fully as
Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-saṁhitā by Lord Brahmā himself
that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No one is equal to or
above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavān, known as Govinda, and He is the
supreme cause of all causes.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ anādir ādir govindaḥ
sarua-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

“There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavān, but Kṛṣṇa is
the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person, and His body
is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval Lord Govinda and the
cause of all causes.” (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.1)

In the Bhāgavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but Kṛṣṇa is described as the original Personality of
Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and Personalities of Godhead expand:

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ
mṛḍayanti yuge yuge

“All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are either
plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of the Supreme Godhead,
but Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.” (Bhag. 1.3.28)

Therefore, Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute
Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonal Brahman.

In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna’s lamentation for
his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and therefore Kṛṣṇa expressed His surprise
with the word kutas, “wherefrom.” Such unmanly sentiments were never expected
from a person belonging to the civilized class of men known as Āryans. The word
āryan is applicable to persons who know the value of life and have a
civilization based on spiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material
conception of life do not know that the aim of life is realization of the
Absolute Truth, Viṣṇu, or Bhagavān, and they are captivated by the external
features of the material world, and therefore they do not know what liberation
is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from material bondage are called
non-Āryans. Although Arjuna was a kṣatriya, he was deviating from his prescribed
duties by declining to fight. This act of cowardice is described as befitting
the non-Āryans. Such deviation from duty does not help one in the progress of
spiritual life, nor does it even give one the opportunity to become famous in
this world. Lord Kṛṣṇa did not approve of the so-called compassion of Arjuna for
his kinsmen.

### 2.3


klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha

naitat tvayy upapadyate

kṣudraṁ hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ

tyaktvottiṣṭha parantapa

klaibyam—impotence; mā—do not; sma—take it; gamaḥ—go in; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
na—never; etat—like this; tvayi—unto you; upapadyate—is befitting; kṣudram—very
little; hṛdaya—heart; daurbalyam—weakness; tyaktvā—giving up; uttiṣṭha—get up;
parantapa—O chastiser of the enemies.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become
you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna was addressed as the “son of Pṛthā,” who happened to be the sister of
Kṛṣṇa’s father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a blood relationship with Kṛṣṇa.
If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, he is a kṣatriya in name only, and
if the son of a brāhmaṇa acts impiously, he is a brāhmaṇa in name only. Such
kṣatriyas and brāhmaṇas are unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore, Kṛṣṇa did
not want Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a kṣatriya. Arjuna was the most
intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa was directly guiding him on the chariot; but
in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the battle, he would be
committing an infamous act; therefore Kṛṣṇa said that such an attitude in Arjuna
did not fit his personality. Arjuna might argue that he would give up the battle
on the grounds of his magnanimous attitude for the most respectable Bhīṣma and
his relatives, but Kṛṣṇa considered that sort of magnanimity not approved by
authority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called nonviolence should be given
up by persons like Arjuna under the direct guidance of Kṛṣṇa.

### 2.4


arjuna uvāca

kathaṁ bhīṣmam ahaṁ saṅkhye

droṇaṁ ca madhusūdana

iṣubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi

pūjārhāv ari-sūdana

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; katham—how; bhīṣmam—unto Bhīṣma; aham—I; saṅkhye—in
the fight; droṇam—unto Droṇa; ca—also, madhusūdana—O killer of Madhu;
iṣubhiḥ—with arrows; pratiyotsyāmi—shall counterattack; pūjā-arhau—those who are
worshipable; arisūdana—O killer of the enemies.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Kṛṣṇa], how can I counterattack with arrows in
battle men like Bhīṣma and Droṇa, who are worthy of my worship?

**PURPORT**

Respectable superiors like Bhīṣma the grandfather and Droṇācārya the teacher are
always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not be counterattacked. It
is general etiquette that superiors are not to be offered even a verbal fight.
Even if they are sometimes harsh in behavior, they should not be harshly
treated. Then, how is it possible for Arjuna to counterattack them? Would Kṛṣṇa
ever attack His own grandfather, Ugrasena, or His teacher, Sāndīpani Muni? These
were some of the arguments by Arjuna to Kṛṣṇa.

### 2.5


gurūn ahatvā hi mahānubhāvān

śreyo bhoktuṁ bhaikṣyam apīha loke

hatvārtha-kāmāṁs tu gurūn ihaiva

bhuñjīya bhogān rudhira-pradigdhān

gurūn—the superiors; ahatvā—by killing; hi—certainly; mahā-anubhāvān—great
souls; śreyaḥ—it is better; bhoktum—to enjoy life; bhaikṣyam—begging; api—even;
iha—in this life; loke—in this world; hatvā—killing; artha—gain; kāmān—so
desiring; tu—but; gurūn—superiors; iha—in this world; eva—certainly;
bhuñjīya—has to enjoy; bhogān—enjoyable things; rudhira—blood;
pradigdhān—tainted with.

**TRANSLATION**

It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the
lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they are avaricious, they
are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our spoils will be tainted with
blood.

**PURPORT**

According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable action and
has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned. Bhīṣma and Droṇa
were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because of his financial assistance,
although they should not have accepted such a position simply on financial
considerations. Under the circumstances, they have lost the respectability of
teachers. But Arjuna thinks that nevertheless they remain his superiors, and
therefore to enjoy material profits after killing them would mean to enjoy
spoils tainted with blood.