### 2.11


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase

gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca

nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aśocyān—that which
is not worthy of lamentation; anvaśocaḥ—you are lamenting; tvam—you;
prajñā-vādāḥ—learned talks; ca—also; bhāṣase—speaking; gata—lost; asūn—life;
agata—not past; asūn—life; ca—also; na—never; anuśocanti—lament; paṇḍitāḥ—the
learned.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what
is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the
dead.

PURPORT

The Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the student,
calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, you are talking like a learned
man, but you do not know that one who is learned—one who knows what is body and
what is soul—does not lament for any stage of the body, neither in the living
nor in the dead condition. As it will be explained in later chapters, it will be
clear that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller of both.
Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given more importance than
politics or sociology, but he did not know that knowledge of matter, soul and
the Supreme is even more important than religious formularies. And, because he
was lacking in that knowledge, he should not have posed himself as a very
learned man. As he did not happen to be a very learned man, he was consequently
lamenting for something which was unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and
is destined to be vanquished today or tomorrow; therefore the body is not as
important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned, and for him there
is no cause for lamentation, regardless of the condition of the material body.

### 2.12


na tv evāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ

na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ

na caiva na bhaviṣyāmaḥ

sarve vayam ataḥ param

na—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jātu—become; na—never; āsam—existed;
na—it is not so; tvam—yourself; na—not; ime—all these; janādhipāḥ—kings;
na—never; ca—also; eva—certainly; na—not like that; bhaviṣyāmaḥ—shall exist;
sarve—all of us; vayam—we; ataḥ param—hereafter.

TRANSLATION

Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor
in the future shall any of us cease to be.

PURPORT

In the Vedas, in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad as well as in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad, it
is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the maintainer of innumerable
living entities, in terms of their different situations according to individual
work and reaction of work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His
plenary portions, alive in the heart of every living entity. Only saintly
persons who can see, within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can actually
attain to perfect and eternal peace.

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān tam ātmasthaṁ ye
’nupaśyanti dhīrās teṣāṁ śāntiḥ śāśvatī netareṣām.

(Kaṭha 2.2.13)

The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the world who
pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poor fund of knowledge.
The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, and all the kings who are
assembled on the battlefield, are eternally individual beings and that the Lord
is eternally the maintainer of the individual living entities both in their
conditioned as well as in their liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord’s eternal
associate, and all the kings assembled there are individual, eternal persons. It
is not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is not that
they will not remain eternal persons. Their individuality existed in the past,
and their individuality will continue in the future without interruption.
Therefore, there is no cause for lamentation for anyone.

The Māyāvādī theory that after liberation the individual soul, separated by the
covering of māyā or illusion, will merge into the impersonal Brahman and lose
its individual existence is not supported herein by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme
authority. Nor is the theory that we only think of individuality in the
conditioned state supported herein. Kṛṣṇa clearly says herein that in the future
also the individuality of the Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the
Upaniṣads, will continue eternally. This statement of Kṛṣṇa is authoritative
because Kṛṣṇa cannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact,
then Kṛṣṇa would not have stressed it so much—even for the future. The Māyāvādī
may argue that the individuality spoken of by Kṛṣṇa is not spiritual, but
material. Even accepting the argument that the individuality is material, then
how can one distinguish Kṛṣṇa’s individuality? Kṛṣṇa affirms His individuality
in the past and confirms His individuality in the future also. He has confirmed
His individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared to be
subordinate to Him. Kṛṣṇa has maintained spiritual individuality all along; if
He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individual consciousness, then
His Bhagavad-gītā has no value as authoritative scripture. A common man with all
the four defects of human frailty is unable to teach that which is worth
hearing. The Gītā is above such literature. No mundane book compares with the
Bhagavad-gītā. When one accepts Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary man, the Gītā loses all
importance. The Māyāvādī argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse is
conventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this verse such a
bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning the bodily conception
of the living entities, how was it possible for Kṛṣṇa to place a conventional
proposition on the body again? Therefore, individuality is maintained on
spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed by great ācāryas like Śrī Rāmānuja and
others. It is clearly mentioned in many places in the Gītā that this spiritual
individuality is understood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are
envious of Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access
to the great literature. The nondevotee’s approach to the teachings of the Gīta
is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. One cannot have a taste of
honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly, the mysticism of the Bhagavad-gītā
can be understood only by devotees, and no one else can taste it, as it is
stated in the Fourth Chapter of the book. Nor can the Gītā be touched by persons
who envy the very existence of the Lord. Therefore, the Māyāvādī explanation of
the Gītā is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya has
forbidden us to read commentations made by the Māyāvādīs and warns that one who
takes to such an understanding of the Māyāvādī philosophy loses all power to
understand the real mystery of the Gītā. If individuality refers to the
empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching by the Lord. The plurality
of the individual soul and of the Lord is an eternal fact, and it is confirmed
by the Vedas as above mentioned.


### 2.13


dehino ’smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

dehinaḥ—of the embodied; asmin—in this; yathā—as; dehe—in the body;
kaumāram—boyhood; yauvanam—youth; jarā—old age; tathā—similarly;
dehāntara—transference of the body; prāptiḥ—achievement; dhīraḥ—the sober;
tatra—thereupon; na—never; muhyati—deluded.

TRANSLATION

As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to
old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized
soul is not bewildered by such a change.

PURPORT

Since every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his body every
moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as a youth, and sometimes as
an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is there and does not undergo any change.
This individual soul finally changes the body at death and transmigrates to
another body; and since it is sure to have another body in the next birth—either
material or spiritual—there was no cause for lamentation by Arjuna on account of
death, neither for Bhīṣma nor for Droṇa, for whom he was so much concerned.
Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies from old to new ones,
thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of body account for varieties of
enjoyment or suffering, according to one’s work in life. So Bhīṣma and Droṇa,
being noble souls, were surely going to have either spiritual bodies in the next
life, or at least life in heavenly bodies for superior enjoyment of material
existence. So, in either case, there was no cause of lamentation.

Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual soul,
the Supersoul, and nature—both material and spiritual—is called a dhīra or a
most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change of bodies. The
Māyāvādī theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be entertained on the
ground that spirit soul cannot be cut into pieces as a fragmental portion. Such
cutting into different individual souls would make the Supreme cleavable or
changeable, against the principle of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable.

As confirmed in the Gītā, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist eternally
(sanātana) and are called kṣara; that is, they have a tendency to fall down into
material nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and even after
liberation, the individual soul remains the same—fragmental. But once liberated,
he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge with the Personality of Godhead.
The theory of reflection can be applied to the Supersoul who is present in each
and every individual body and is known as the Paramātmā, who is different from
the individual living entity. When the sky is reflected in water, the
reflections represent both the sun and the moon and the stars also. The stars
can be compared to the living entities and the sun or the moon to the Supreme
Lord. The individual fragmental spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and the
Supreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They are not on the same
level, as it will be apparent in the beginning of the Fourth Chapter. If Arjuna
is on the same level with Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is not superior to Arjuna, then their
relationship of instructor and instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them
are deluded by the illusory energy (māyā), then there is no need of one being
the instructor and the other the instructed. Such instruction would be useless
because, in the clutches of māyā, no one can be an authoritative instructor.
Under the circumstances, it is admitted that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord,
superior in position to the living entity, Arjuna, who is a forgotten soul
deluded by māyā.

### 2.14


mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino ’nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

mātrā—sensuous; sparśāḥ—perception; tu—only; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
śīta—winter; uṣṇa—summer; sukha—happiness; duḥkha-daḥ—giving pain;
āgama—appearing; apāyinaḥ—disappearing; anityāḥ—nonpermanent; tān—all of them;
titikṣasva—just try to tolerate; bhārata—O descendant of the Bhārata dynasty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their
disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter
and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and
one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.

PURPORT

In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate nonpermanent
appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress. According to Vedic
injunction, one has to take his bath early in the morning even during the month
of Māgha (January-February). It is very cold at that time, but in spite of that
a man who abides by the religious principles does not hesitate to take his bath.
Similarly, a woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May
and June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute his duty in
spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the religious principle
of the kṣatriyas, and although one has to fight with some friend or relative,
one should not deviate from his prescribed duty. One has to follow the
prescribed rules and regulations of religious principles in order to rise up to
the platform of knowledge because by knowledge and devotion only can one
liberate himself from the clutches of māyā (illusion).

The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also significant. To
address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood relations from his mother’s
side; and to address him as Bhārata signifies his greatness from his father’s
side. From both sides he is supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage
brings responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore, he
cannot avoid fighting.

### 2.15


yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete

puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha

sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ

so ’mṛtatvāya kalpate

yam—one who; hi—certainly; na—never; vyathayanti—are distressing; ete—all these;
puruṣam—to a person; puruṣarṣabha—is best among men; sama—unaltered;
duḥkha—distress; sukham—happiness; dhīram—patient; saḥ—he; amṛtatvāya—for
liberation; kalpate—is considered eligible.

TRANSLATION

O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and
distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.

PURPORT

Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of spiritual
realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of distress and happiness is
certainly a person eligible for liberation. In the varṇāśrama institution, the
fourth stage of life, namely the renounced order (sannyāsa) is a painstaking
situation. But one who is serious about making his life perfect surely adopts
the sannyāsa order of life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties
usually arise from having to sever family relationships, to give up the
connection of wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such
difficulties, surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly,
in Arjuna’s discharge of duties as a kṣatriya, he is advised to persevere, even
if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly beloved
persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyāsa at the age of twenty-four, and His
dependants, young wife as well as old mother, had no one else to look after
them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyāsa and was steady in the discharge of
higher duties. That is the way of achieving liberation from material bondage.

### 2.16


nāsato vidyate bhāvo

nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ

ubhayor api dṛṣṭo ’ntas

tv anayos tattva-darśibhiḥ

na—never; asataḥ—of the nonexistent; vidyate—there is; bhāvaḥ—endurance;
na—never; abhāvaḥ—changing quality; vidyate—there is; sataḥ—of the eternal;
ubhayoḥ—of the two; api—verily; dṛṣṭaḥ—observed; antaḥ—conclusion; tu—but;
anayoḥ—of them; tattva—truth; darśibhiḥ—by the seers.

TRANSLATION

Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent there is
no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. This seers have
concluded by studying the nature of both.

PURPORT

There is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing every
moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is admitted by modern
medical science; and thus growth and old age are taking place in the body. But
the spirit soul exists permanently, remaining the same despite all changes of
the body and the mind. That is the difference between matter and spirit. By
nature, the body is ever changing, and the soul is eternal. This conclusion is
established by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist and
personalist. In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is stated that Viṣṇu and His abodes all have
self-illuminated spiritual existence. “Jyotīṁṣi viṣṇur bhavanāni viṣṇuḥ.” The
words existent and nonexistent refer only to spirit and matter. That is the
version of all seers of truth.

This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the living entities who
are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal of ignorance involves the
reestablishment of the eternal relationship between the worshiper and the
worshipable and the consequent understanding of the difference between the part
and parcel living entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can
understand the nature of the Supreme by thorough study of oneself, the
difference between oneself and the Supreme being understood as the relationship
between the part and the whole. In the Vedānta-sūtras, as well as in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin of all
emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior and inferior natural
sequences. The living entities belong to the superior nature, as it will be
revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although there is no difference between the
energy and the energetic, the energetic is accepted as the Supreme, and energy
or nature is accepted as the subordinate. The living entities, therefore, are
always subordinate to the Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and the
servant, or the teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible to
understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away such ignorance the
Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gītā for the enlightenment of all living entities for
all time.
