### 2.17


avināśi tu tad viddhi

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

vināśam avyayasyāsya

na kaścit kartum arhati

avināśi—imperishable; tu—but; tat—that; viddhi—know it; yena—by whom; sarvam—all
of the body; idam—this; tatam—widespread; vināśam—destruction; avyayasya—of the
imperishable; asya—of it; na kaścit—no one; kartum—to do; arhati—able.

**TRANSLATION**

Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is able to
destroy the imperishable soul.

**PURPORT**

This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is spread
all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over the body: it is
consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and pleasures of the body in
part or as a whole. This spreading of consciousness is limited within one’s own
body. The pains and pleasures of one body are unknown to another. Therefore,
each and every body is the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom of
the soul’s presence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul is
described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair point in
size. The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad confirms this:

bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca bhāgo jīvaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa
cānantyāya kalpate.

 “When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and again
 each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such part is
 the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul.” (Svet. 5.9) Similarly, in
 the Bhāgavatam the same version is stated:

keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatāṁśaḥ sādṛśātmakaḥ jīvaḥ sūkṣma-svarupo ’yaṁ
saṅkhyātīto hi cit-kaṇaḥ

“There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured as one
ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair.”

Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atom smaller
than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. This very small
spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body, and the influence
of such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body as the influence of the
active principle of some medicine spreads throughout the body. This current of
the spirit soul is felt all over the body as consciousness, and that is the
proof of the presence of the soul. Any layman can understand that the material
body minus consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be
revived in the body by any means of material administration. Therefore,
consciousness is not due to any amount of material combination, but to the
spirit soul. In the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad the measurement of the atomic spirit soul
is further explained:

eṣo ’ṇurātmā cetasā veditavyo yasmin prāṇaḥ pañcadhā saṁviveśa prāṇaiś cittaṁ
sarvam otam prajānāṁ yasmin viśuddhe vibhavaty eṣa ātmā.

“The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect intelligence. This
atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air [prāṇa, apāna, vyāna, samāna
and udāna], is situated within the heart, and spreads its influence all over the
body of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from the
contamination of the five kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is
exhibited.” (Muṇḍ. 3.1.9)

The haṭha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of air encircling
the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures—not for any material
profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the entanglement of the
material atmosphere.

So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedic literatures, and
it is also actually felt in the practical experience of any sane man. Only the
insane man can think of this atomic soul as all-pervading Viṣṇu-tattva.

The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particular body.
According to the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad, this atomic soul is situated in the heart of
every living entity, and because the measurement of the atomic soul is beyond
the power of appreciation of the material scientists, some of them assert
foolishly that there is no soul. The individual atomic soul is definitely there
in the heart along with the Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily
movement are emanating from this part of the body. The corpuscles which carry
the oxygen from the lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul passes away
from this position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases. Medical
science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but it cannot ascertain
that the source of the energy is the soul. Medical science, however, does admit
that the heart is the seat of all energies of the body.

Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules. Similarly,
the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks of the rays of the
Supreme Lord, called by the name prabhā or superior energy. Neither Vedic
knowledge nor modern science denies the existence of the spirit soul in the
body, and the science of the soul is explicitly described in the Bhagavad-gītā
by the Personality of Godhead Himself.

### 2.18


antavanta ime dehā

nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ

anāśino ’prameyasya

tasmād yudhyasva bhārata

antavantaḥ—perishable; ime—all these; dehāḥ—material bodies; nityasya—eternal in
existence; uktāḥ—it is so said; sarīriṇaḥ—the embodied souls; anāśinaḥ—never to
be destroyed; aprameyasya—immeasurable; tasmāt—therefore; yudhyasva—fight;
bhārata—O descendant of Bharata.

**TRANSLATION**

Only the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living
entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata.

**PURPORT**

The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately, or it may
do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only. There is no chance
of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul is so minute that it cannot
even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of being killed. As mentioned in the
previous verse, it is so small that no one can have any idea how to measure its
dimension. So from both viewpoints there is no cause of lamentation because the
living entity can neither be killed as he is, nor can the material body, which
cannot be saved for any length of time, be permanently protected. The minute
particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to his work,
and therefore observance of religious principles should be utilized. In the
Vedānta-sūtras the living entity is qualified as light because he is part and
parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight maintains the entire universe, so the
light of the soul maintains this material body. As soon as the spirit soul is
out of this material body, the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the
spirit soul which maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna
was advised to fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of religion.

### 2.19


ya enaṁ vetti hantāraṁ

yaś cainaṁ manyate hatam

ubhau tau na vijānīto

nāyaṁ hanti na hanyate

yaḥ—anyone; enam—this; vetti—knows; hantāram—the killer; yaḥ—anyone; ca—also;
enam—this; manyate—thinks; hatam—killed; ubhau—both of them; tau—they; na—never;
vijānītaḥ—in knowledge; na—never; ayam—this; hanti—kills; na—nor; hanyate—be
killed.

**TRANSLATION**

He who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain, does not
understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slays not nor is slain.

**PURPORT**

When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be known that
the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit soul is so small
that it is impossible to kill him by any material weapon, as is evident from the
previous verses. Nor is the living entity killable because of his spiritual
constitution. What is killed, or is supposed to be killed, is the body only.
This, however, does not at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic
injunction is, “māhiṁsyāt sarva-bhūtāni” never commit violence to anyone. Nor
does understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal
slaughter. Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable and is
punishable by the law of the state as well as by the law of the Lord. Arjuna,
however, is being engaged in killing for the principle of religion, and not
whimsically.

### 2.20


na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin

nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ

ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇo

na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre

na—never; jāyate—takes birth; mriyate—never dies; vā—either; kadācit—at any time
(past, present or future); na—never; ayam—this; bhūtvā—came into being;
bhavitā—will come to be; vā—or; na—not; bhūyaḥ—or has come to be; ajaḥ—unborn;
nityaḥ—eternal; śāśvataḥ—permanent; ayam—this; purāṇaḥ—the oldest; na—never;
hanyate—is killed; hanyamāne—being killed; śarīre—by the body.

**TRANSLATION**

For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever
cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He is
not slain when the body is slain.

**PURPORT**

Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit is one
with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body. Sometimes the soul is
called the steady, or kūṭastha. The body is subject to six kinds of
transformations. It takes its birth in the womb of the mother’s body, remains
for some time, grows, produces some effects, gradually dwindles, and at last
vanishes into oblivion. The soul, however, does not go through such changes. The
soul is not born, but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its
birth. The soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anything
which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, he therefore
has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing, and primeval—that
is, there is no trace in history of his coming into being. Under the impression
of the body, we seek the history of birth, etc., of the soul. The soul does not
at any time become old, as the body does. The so-called old man, therefore,
feels himself to be in the same spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes
of the body do not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree,
nor anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-products of the
body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and, owing to the
body, they appear as children of a particular man. The body develops because of
the soul’s presence, but the soul has neither offshoots nor change. Therefore,
the soul is free from the six changes of the body.

In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad also we find a similar passage which reads:

na jāyate mriyate vā vipaścin nāyaṁ kutaścin na vibhūva kaścit ajo nityaḥ
śāśvato ’yaṁ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre.

(Kaṭha 1.2.18)

The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-gītā, but
here in this verse there is one special word, vipaścit, which means learned or
with knowledge.

The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness. Therefore,
consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does not find the soul
within the heart, where he is situated, one can still understand the presence of
the soul simply by the presence of consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the
sun in the sky owing to clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the
sun is always there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon
as there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can understand
that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some consciousness in all
bodies—whether man or animal—we can understand the presence of the soul. This
consciousness of the soul is, however, different from the consciousness of the
Supreme because the supreme consciousness is all-knowledge—past, present and
future. The consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When
he is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenment from
the superior lessons of Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa is not like the forgetful soul. If so,
Kṛṣṇa’s teachings of Bhagavad-gītā would be useless.

There are two kinds of souls—namely the minute particle soul (aṇu-ātmā) and the
Supersoul (the vibhu-ātmā). This is also confirmed in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad in this
way:

aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān ātmāsya jantor nihito guhāyām tam akratuḥ paśyati
vīta-śoko dhātuḥ prasādān mahimānam ātmanaḥ

(Kaṭha 1.2.20)

“Both the Supersoul [Paramātmā] and the atomic soul [jīvātmā] are situated on
the same tree of the body within the same heart of the living being, and only
one who has become free from all material desires as well as lamentations can,
by the grace of the Supreme, understand the glories of the soul.” Kṛṣṇa is the
fountainhead of the Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following
chapters, and Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore
he requires to be enlightened by Kṛṣṇa, or by His bona fide representative (the
spiritual master).
