### 2.21

vedāvināśinaṁ nityaṁ

ya enam ajam avyayam

kathaṁ sa puruṣaḥ pārtha

kaṁ ghātayati hanti kam

veda—in knowledge; avināśinam—indestructible; nityam—always; yaḥ—one who;
enam—this (soul); ajam—unborn; avyayam—immutable; katham—how; saḥ—he;
puruṣaḥ—person; pārtha—O Pārtha (Arjuna); kam—whom; ghātayati—hurts;
hanti—kills; kam—whom.

TRANSLATION

O Pārtha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible, unborn,
eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

PURPORT

Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in complete
knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper utility.
Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply violence rests with
the person in knowledge. Although the justice of the peace awards capital
punishment to a person condemned for murder, the justice of the peace cannot be
blamed because he orders violence to another person according to the codes of
justice. In Manu-saṁhitā, the lawbook for mankind, it is supported that a
murderer should be condemned to death so that in his next life he will not have
to suffer for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king’s punishment
of hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa orders
fighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice, and, as
such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that such violence,
committed in the act of fighting for Kṛṣṇa, is not violence at all because, at
any rate, the man, or rather the soul, cannot be killed; so for the
administration of justice, so-called violence is permitted. A surgical operation
is not meant to kill the patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be
executed by Arjuna at the instruction of Kṛṣṇa is with full knowledge, so there
is no possibility of sinful reaction.

### 2.22


vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya

navāni gṛhṇāti naro ’parāṇi

tathā śarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇāny

anyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī

vāsāṁsi—garments; jīrṇāni—old and worn out; yathā—as it is; vihāya—giving up;
navāni—new garments; gṛhṇāti—does accept; naraḥ—a man; aparāṇi—other; tathā—in
the same way; śarīrāṇi—bodies; vihāya—giving up; jīrṇāni—old and useless;
anyāni—different; saṁyāti—verily accepts; navāni—new sets; dehī—the embodied.

TRANSLATION

As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the soul
accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

PURPORT

Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even some of
the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of the soul, but at
the same time cannot explain the source of energy from the heart, have to accept
continuous changes of body which appear from childhood to boyhood and from
boyhood to youth and again from youth to old age. From old age, the change is
transferred to another body. This has already been explained in the previous
verse.

Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made possible by
the grace of the Supersoul.The Supersoul fulfills the desire of the atomic soul
as one friend fulfills the desire of another. The Vedas, like the Muṇḍaka
Upaniṣad, as well as the Śvetāśvatara Upanisad, compare the soul and the
Supersoul to two friendly birds sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the
individual atomic soul) is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird
(Kṛṣṇa) is simply watching His friend. Of these two birds—although they are the
same in quality—one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while the
other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Kṛṣṇa is the witnessing
bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are friends, one is still the
master and the other is the servant. Forgetfulness of this relationship by the
atomic soul is the cause of one’s changing his position from one tree to another
or from one body to another. The jīva soul is struggling very hard on the tree
of the material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird as the
supreme spiritual master—as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrender unto
Kṛṣṇa for instruction—the subordinate bird immediately becomes free from all
lamentations. Both the Kaṭha Upaniṣad and Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad confirm this:

samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagno ’nīśayā śocati muhyamānaḥ juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyaty anyam
īśam asya mahimānam iti vīta-śokaḥ

“Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully engrossed
with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of the tree. But if in
some way or other he turns his face to his friend who is the Lord and knows His
glories—at once the suffering bird becomes free from all anxieties.” Arjuna has
now turned his face towards his eternal friend, Kṛṣṇa, and is understanding the
Bhagavad-gītā from Him. And thus, hearing from Kṛṣṇa, he can understand the
supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.

Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily change of
his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be happy to kill their
bodies in the righteous fight so that they may be cleansed at once of all
reactions from various bodily activities. One who lays down his life on the
sacrificial altar, or in the proper battlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily
reactions and promoted to a higher status of life. So there was no cause for
Arjuna’s lamentation.

### 2.23


nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi

nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ

na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo

na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

na—never; enam—unto this soul; chindanti—can cut into pieces; śastrāṇi —all
weapons; na—never; enam—unto this soul; dahati—burns; pāvakaḥ—fire; na—never;
ca—also; enam—unto this soul; kledayanti—moistens; āpaḥ —water; na—never;
śoṣayati—dries; mārutaḥ—wind.

TRANSLATION

The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can he be burned by
fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.

PURPORT

All kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc., are unable to kill
the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kinds of weapons made of earth,
water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the modern weapons of fire. Even the
nuclear weapons of the modern age are classified as fire weapons, but formerly
there were other weapons made of all different types of material elements.
Firearms were counteracted by water weapons, which are now unknown to modern
science. Nor do modern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons.
Nonetheless, the soul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any
number of weapons, regardless of scientific devices.

Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original Soul. The
Māyāvādī, however, cannot describe how the individual soul evolved from
ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory energy. Because they are
atomic individual souls (sanātana) eternally, they are prone to be covered by
the illusory energy, and thus they become separated from the association of the
Supreme Lord, just as the sparks of the fire, although one in quality with the
fire, are prone to be extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varāha Purāṇa,
the living entities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.
They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gītā also. So, even after being
liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a separate identity, as is
evident from the teachings of the Lord to Arjuna. Arjuna became liberated by the
knowledge received from Kṛṣṇa, but he never became one with Kṛṣṇa.


### 2.24


acchedyo ’yam adāhyo ’yam

akledyo ’śoṣya eva ca

nityaḥ sarva-gataḥ sthāṇur

acalo ’yaṁ sanātanaḥ

acchedyaḥ—unbreakable; ayam—this soul; adāhyaḥ—cannot be burned; ayam—this soul;
akledyaḥ—insoluble; aśoṣyaḥ—cannot be dried; eva—certainly; ca—and;
nityaḥ—everlasting; sarva-gataḥ—all-pervading; sthāṇuḥ—unchangeable;
acalaḥ—immovable; ayam—this soul; sanātanaḥ—eternally the same.

TRANSLATION

This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned nor
dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable and eternally
the same.

PURPORT

All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the individual
soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole, and he remains the
same atom eternally, without change. The theory of monism is very difficult to
apply in this case, because the individual soul is never expected to become one
homogeneously. After liberation from material contamination, the atomic soul may
prefer to remain as a spiritual spark in the effulgent rays of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but the intelligent souls enter into the spiritual
planets to associate with the Personality of Godhead.

The word sarva-gataḥ (all-pervading) is significant because there is no doubt
that living entities are all over God’s creation. They live on the land, in the
water, in the air, within the earth and even within fire. The belief that they
are sterilized in fire is not acceptable, because it is clearly stated here that
the soul cannot be burned by fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are
living entities also in the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If
the sun globe is uninhabited, then the word sarva-gataḥ—living
everywhere—becomes meaningless.

### 2.25


avyakto ’yam acintyo ’yam

avikāryo ’yam ucyate

tasmād evaṁ viditvainaṁ

nānuśocitum arhasi

avyaktaḥ—invisible; ayam—this soul; acintyaḥ—inconceivable; ayam—this soul;
avikāryaḥ—unchangeable; ayam—this soul; ucyate—is said; tasmāt—therefore;
evam—like this; viditvā—knowing it well; enam—this soul; na—do not;
anuśocitum—may lament over; arhasi—you deserve.

TRANSLATION

It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.

PURPORT

As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our material
calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful microscope;
therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul’s existence is concerned, no one
can establish his existence experimentally beyond the proof of śruti or Vedic
wisdom. We have to accept this truth, because there is no other source of
understanding the existence of the soul, although it is a fact by perception.
There are many things we have to accept solely on grounds of superior authority.
No one can deny the existence of his father, based upon the authority of his
mother. There is no other source of understanding the identity of the father
except by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no other source of
understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words, the soul is
inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is consciousness and
conscious—that also is the statement of the Vedas, and we have to accept that.
Unlike the bodily changes, there is no change in the soul. As eternally
unchangeable, the soul remains atomic in comparison to the infinite Supreme
Soul. The Supreme Soul is infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal.
Therefore, the infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to
the infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept is
repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stability of the
conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in order that we
understand the matter thoroughly without error.

### 2.26


atha cainaṁ nitya-jātaṁ

nityaṁ vā manyase mṛtam

tathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho

nainaṁ śocitum arhasi

atha—if, however; ca—also; enam—this soul; nitya-jātam—always born;
nityam—forever; vā—either; manyase—so think; mṛtam—dead; tathāpi—still;
tvam—you; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; na—never; enam—about the soul;
śocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always dies, still
you have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.

PURPORT

There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists, who do
not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the body. When Lord
Kṛṣṇa spoke the Bhagavad-gītā, it appears that such philosophers existed, and
they were known as the Lokāyatikas and Vaibhāṣikas. These philosophers
maintained that life symptoms, or soul, takes place at a certain mature
condition of material combination. The modern material scientist and materialist
philosophers also think similarly. According to them, the body is a combination
of physical elements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms develop by
interaction of the physical and chemical elements. The science of anthropology
is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudo-religions—now becoming
fashionable in America—are also adhering to this philosophy, as well as to the
nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist sects.

Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul—as in the Vaibhāṣika
philosophy—there would still have been no cause for lamentation. No one laments
the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals and stops discharging his prescribed
duty. On the other hand, in modern science and scientific warfare, so many tons
of chemicals are wasted for achieving victory over the enemy. According to the
Vaibhāṣika philosophy, the so-called soul or ātmā vanishes along with the
deterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna accepted the Vedic
conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did not believe in the
existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament. According to this theory,
since there are so many living entities generating out of matter every moment,
and so many of them are being vanquished every moment, there is no need to
grieve for such an incidence. However, since he was not risking rebirth of the
soul, Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected with sinful reactions
due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the same time, Kṛṣṇa
sarcastically addressed Arjuna as mahā-bāhu, mighty-armed, because He, at least,
did not accept the theory of the Vaibhāṣikas, which leaves aside the Vedic
wisdom. As a kṣatriya, Arjuna belonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved him
to continue to follow its principles.
