### 2.27


jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca

tasmād aparihārye ’rthe

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

jātasya—one who has taken his birth; hi—certainly; dhruvaḥ—a fact; mṛtyuḥ—death;
dhruvam—it is also a fact; janma—birth; mṛtasya—of the dead; ca—also;
tasmāt—therefore; aparihārye—for that which is unavoidable; arthe—in the matter
of; na—do not; tvam—you; śocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.

**TRANSLATION**

For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead,
birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you
should not lament.

**PURPORT**

One has to take birth according to one’s activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the next. In
this way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one after the other without
liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not, however, support unnecessary
murder, slaughter and war. But at the same time, violence and war are inevitable
factors in human society for keeping law and order.

The Battle of Kurukṣetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an inevitable
event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a kṣatriya. Why should he
be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his relatives since he was discharging
his proper duty? He did not deserve to break the law, thereby becoming subjected
to the reactions of sinful acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the
discharge of his proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his
relatives, and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.

### 2.28


avyaktādīni bhūtāni

vyakta-madhyāni bhārata

avyakta-nidhanāny eva

tatra kā paridevanā

avyaktādīni—in the beginning unmanifested; bhūtāni—all that are created;
vyakta—manifested; madhyāni—in the middle; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata;
avyakta—nonmanifested; nidhanāni—all that are vanquished; eva—it is all like
that; tatra—therefore; kā—what; paridevanā—lamentation.

**TRANSLATION**

All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their interim
state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So what need is there for
lamentation?

**PURPORT**

Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in the
existence of soul and the other not believing in the existence of the soul,
there is no cause for lamentation in either case. Nonbelievers in the existence
of the soul are called atheists by followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for
argument’s sake, we accept the atheistic theory, there is still no cause for
lamentation. Apart from the separate existence of the soul, the material
elements remain unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of
unmanifestation comes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from
air, fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestations take place.
Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the earth. When it is
dismantled, the manifestation becomes again unmanifested and remains as atoms in
the ultimate stage. The law of conservation of energy remains, but in course of
time things are manifested and unmanifested—that is the difference. Then what
cause is there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation or
unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage, things are
not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements remain
unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, and this does not make
any real material difference.

And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (antavanta
ime dehāḥ) that these material bodies are perishable in due course of time
(nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ) but that soul is eternal, then we must remember always
that the body is like a dress; therefore why lament the changing of a dress? The
material body has no factual existence in relation to the eternal soul. It is
something like a dream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky, or sitting
on a chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are neither in
the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages self-realization
on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body. Therefore, in either
case, whether one believes in the existence of the soul, or one does not believe
in the existence of the soul, there is no cause for lamentation for loss of the
body.

### 2.29


āścarya-vat paśyati kaścid enam

āścarya-vad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ

āścarya-vac cainam anyaḥ śṛṇoti

śrutvāpy enaṁ veda na caiva kaścit

āścaryavat—amazing; paśyati—see; kaścit—some; enam—this soul;
āścaryavat—amazing; vadati—speak; tathā—there; eva—certainly; ca—also;
anyaḥ—others; āścaryavat—similarly amazing; ca—also; enam—this soul;
anyaḥ—others; śṛṇoti—hear; śrutvā—having heard; api—even; enam—this soul;
veda—do know; na—never; ca—and; eva—certainly; kaścit—anyone.

**TRANSLATION**

Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some hear of
him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about him, cannot understand
him at all.

**PURPORT**

Since Gītopaniṣad is largely based on the principles of the Upaniṣads, it is not
surprising to also find this passage in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad.

śravaṇāyāpi bahubhir yo na labhyaḥ śṛṇvanto ’pi bahavo yaḥ na vidyuḥ āścaryo
vaktā kuśalo ’sya labdhā āścaryo jñātā kuśalānuśiṣṭaḥ.

The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal, in the
body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs, millions and
billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is certainly very amazing. Men
with a poor fund of knowledge and men who are not austere cannot understand the
wonders of the individual atomic spark of spirit, even though it is explained by
the greatest authority of knowledge, who imparted lessons even to Brahmā, the
first living being in the universe. Owing to a gross material conception of
things, most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small particle can become
both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper as wonderful either
by constitution or by description. Illusioned by the material energy, people are
so engrossed in subject matter for sense gratification that they have very
little time to understand the question of self-understanding, even though it is
a fact that without this self-understanding all activities result in ultimate
defeat in the struggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that one must
think of the soul, and also make a solution of the material miseries.

Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attending lectures,
in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, they are misguided by
acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one without distinction of
magnitude. It is very difficult to find a man who perfectly understands the
position of the soul, the Supersoul, the atomic soul, their respective
functions, relationships and all other major and minor details. And it is still
more difficult to find a man who has actually derived full benefit from
knowledge of the soul, and who is able to describe the position of the soul in
different aspects. But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the
subject matter of the soul, then one’s life is successful. The easiest process
for understanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept the
statements of the Bhagavad-gītā spoken by the greatest authority, Lord Kṛṣṇa,
without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires a great deal of
penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in the previous ones, before one
is able to accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa can,
however, be known as such by the causeless mercy of the pure devotee and by no
other way.

### 2.30


dehī nityam avadhyo ’yaṁ

dehe sarvasya bhārata

tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi

dehī—the owner of the material body; nityam—eternally; avadhyaḥ—cannot be
killed; ayam—this soul; dehe—in the body; sarvasya—of everyone; bhārata—O
descendant of Bharata; tasmāt—therefore; sarvāṇi—all; bhūtāni—living entities
(that are born); na—never; tvam—yourself; śocitum —to lament; arhasi— deserve.

**TRANSLATION**

O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can never be
slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.

**PURPORT**

The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable spirit soul.
In describing the immortal soul in various ways, Lord Kṛṣṇa establishes that the
soul is immortal and the body is temporary. Therefore Arjuna as a kṣatriya
should not abandon his duty out of fear that his grandfather and teacher—Bhīṣma
and Droṇa—will die in the battle. On the authority of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one has to
believe that there is a soul different from the material body, not that there is
no such thing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a certain stage of
material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals. Though the soul
is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time of war it is not
discouraged when there is actual need for it. That need must be justified in
terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not capriciously.

### 2.31


sva-dharmam api cāvekṣya

na vikampitum arhasi

dharmyād dhi yuddhāc chreyo ’nyat

kṣatriyasya na vidyate

svadharmam—one’s own religious principles; api—also; ca—indeed;
avekṣya—considering; na—never; vikampitum—to hesitate; arhasi—you deserve;
dharmyāt—from religious principles; hi—indeed; yuddhāt—of fighting;
śreyaḥ—better engagements; anyat—anything else; kṣatriyasya—of the kṣatriya;
na—does not; vidyate—exist.

**TRANSLATION**

Considering your specific duty as a kṣatriya, you should know that there is no
better engagement for you than fighting on religious principles; and so there is
no need for hesitation.

**PURPORT**

Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for the
matter of good administration, is called kṣatriya. Kṣat means hurt. One who
gives protection from harm is called kṣatriya (trayate—to give protection). The
kṣatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. A kṣatriya would go into the
forest and challenge a tiger face to face and fight with the tiger with his
sword. When the tiger was killed, it would be offered the royal order of
cremation. This system is being followed even up to the present day by the
kṣatriya kings of Jaipur state. The kṣatriyas are specially trained for
challenging and killing because religious violence is sometimes a necessary
factor. Therefore, kṣatriyas are never meant for accepting directly the order of
sannyāsa or renunciation. Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it is
never a factor or principle. In the religious law books it is stated:

āhaveṣu mitho ’nyonyaṁ jighāṁsanto mahīkṣitaḥ yuddhamānāḥ paraṁ śaktyā svargaṁ
yānty aparāṅmukhāḥ yajñeṣu paśavo brahman hanyante satataṁ dvijaiḥ saṁskṛtāḥ
kila mantraiś ca te ’pi svargam avāpnuvan.

“In the battlefield, a king or kṣatriya, while fighting another king envious of
him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death, as the brāhmaṇas
also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificing animals in the sacrificial
fire.” Therefore, killing on the battle on the religious principle and the
killing of animals in the sacrificial fire are not at all considered to be acts
of violence, because everyone is benefitted by the religious principles
involved. The animal sacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing
the gradual evolutionary process from one form to another, and the kṣatriyas
killed in the battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brāhmaṇas
who attain them by offering sacrifice.

There are two kinds of svadharmas, specific duties. As long as one is not
liberated, one has to perform the duties of that particular body in accordance
with religious principles in order to achieve liberation. When one is liberated,
one’s svadharma—specific duty—becomes spiritual and is not in the material
bodily concept. In the bodily conception of life there are specific duties for
the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable.
Svadharma is ordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth
Chapter. On the bodily plane svadharma is called varṇāśrama-dharma, or man’s
steppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization begins from the
stage of varṇāśrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of the specific modes of
nature of the body obtained. Discharging one’s specific duty in any field of
action in accordance with varṇāśrama-dharma serves to elevate one to a higher
status of life.

### 2.32


yadṛcchayā copapannaṁ

svarga-dvāram apāvṛtam

sukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha

labhante yuddham īdṛśam

yadṛcchayā—by its own accord; ca—also; upapannam—arrived at; svarga—heavenly
planet; dvāram—door; apāvṛtam—wide open; sukhinaḥ—very happy; kṣatriyāḥ—the
members of the royal order; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; labhante—do achieve;
yuddham—war; īdṛśam—like this.

**TRANSLATION**

O Pārtha, happy are the kṣatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities come
unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.

**PURPORT**

As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Kṛṣṇa condemns the attitude of Arjuna who
said, “I do not find any good in this fighting. It will cause perpetual
habitation in hell.” Such statements by Arjuna were due to ignorance only. He
wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of his specific duty. For a
kṣatriya to be in the battlefield and to become nonviolent is the philosophy of
fools. In the Parāśara-smṛti or religious codes made by Parāśara, the great sage
and father of Vyāsadeva, it is stated:

kṣatriyo hi prajā rakṣan śastra-pāṇiḥ pradaṇḍayan nirjitya parasainyādi kṣitiṁ
dharmeṇa pālayet.

“The kṣatriya’s duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of difficulties,
and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable cases for law and
order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of inimical kings, and thus,
with religious principles, he should rule over the world.”

Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting. If he
should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he should die in
the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets whose doors were wide
open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in either case.
