### 2.33


atha cet tvam imaṁ dharmyaṁ

saṅgrāmaṁ na kariṣyasi

tataḥ sva-dharmaṁ kīrtiṁ ca

hitvā pāpam avāpsyasi

atha—therefore; cet—if; tvam—you; imam—this; dharmyam—religious duty;
saṅgrāmam—fighting; na—do not; kariṣyasi—perform; tataḥ—then; svadharmam—your
religious duty; kīrtim—-reputation; ca—also; hitvā—losing; pāpam—sinful
reaction; avāpsyasi—do gain.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will certainly incur
sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your reputation as a fighter.

PURPORT

Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many great
demigods, including even Lord Śiva. After fighting and defeating Lord Śiva in
the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the Lord and received as a reward a weapon
called pāśupata-astra. Everyone knew that he was a great warrior. Even
Droṇācārya gave him benediction and awarded him the special weapon by which he
could kill even his teacher. So he was credited with so many military
certificates from many authorities, including his adopted father Indra, the
heavenly king. But if he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his
specific duty as a kṣatriya, but he would lose all his fame and good name and
thus prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell, not by
fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.

### 2.34


akīrtiṁ cāpi bhūtāni

kathayiṣyanti te ’vyayām

sambhāvitasya cākīrtir

maraṇād atiricyate

akīrtim—infamy; ca—also; api—over and above; bhūtāni—all people;
kathayiṣyanti—will speak; te—of you; avyayām—forever; sambhāvitasya—for a
respectable man; ca—also; akīrtiḥ—ill fame; maraṇāt—than death;
atiricyate—becomes more than.

TRANSLATION

People will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been honored,
dishonor is worse than death.

PURPORT

Both as friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Kṛṣṇa now gives His final
judgement regarding Arjuna’s refusal to fight. The Lord says, “Arjuna, if you
leave the battlefield, people will call you a coward even before your actual
flight. And if you think that people may call you bad names but that you will
save your life by fleeing the battlefield, then My advice is that you’d do
better to die in the battle. For a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse
than death. So, you should not flee for fear of your life; better to die in the
battle. That will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and from
losing your prestige in society.”

So, the final judgement of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle and not
withdraw.

### 2.35


bhayād raṇād uparataṁ

maṁsyante tvāṁ mahā-rathāḥ

yeṣāṁ ca tvaṁ bahu-mato

bhūtvā yāsyasi lāghavam

bhayāt—out of fear; raṇāt—from the battlefield; uparatam—ceased; maṁsyante—will
consider; tvām—unto you; mahā-rathāḥ—the great generals; yeṣām—of those who;
ca—also; tvam—you; bahu-mataḥ—in great estimation; bhūtvā—will become;
yāsyasi—will go; lāghavam—decreased in value.

TRANSLATION

The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will think that
you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus they will consider you
a coward.

PURPORT

Lord Kṛṣṇa continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: “Do not think that the great
generals like Duryodhana, Karṇa, and other contemporaries will think that you
have left the battlefield out of compassion for your brothers and grandfather.
They will think that you have left out of fear for your life. And thus their
high estimation of your personality will go to hell.”

### 2.36


avācya-vādāṁś ca bahūn

vadiṣyanti tavāhitāḥ

nindantas tava sāmarthyaṁ

tato duḥkhataraṁ nu kim

avācya—unkind; vādān—fabricated words; ca—also; bahūn—many; vadiṣyanti—will say;
tava—your; ahitāḥ—enemies; nindantaḥ—while vilifying; tava—your;
sāmarthyam—ability; tataḥ—thereafter; duḥkhataram—more painful; nu—of course;
kim—what is there.

TRANSLATION

Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your ability. What
could be more painful for you?

PURPORT

Lord Kṛṣṇa was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna’s uncalled-for plea for
compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the non-Aryans. Now in
so many words, He has proved His statements against Arjuna’s so-called
compassion.

### 2.37


hato vā prāpsyasi svargaṁ

jitvā vā bhokṣyase mahīm

tasmād uttiṣṭha kaunteya

yuddhāya kṛta-niścayaḥ

hataḥ—being killed; vā—either; prāpsyasi—you gain; svargam—the heavenly kingdom;
jitvā—by conquering; vā—or; bhokṣyase—you enjoy; mahīm—the world;
tasmāt—therefore; uttiṣṭha—get up; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; yuddhāya—to fight;
kṛta—determination; niścayaḥ—uncertainty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kuntī, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain the
heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom. Therefore
get up and fight with determination.

PURPORT

Even though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna’s side, he still had to
fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevated into the heavenly
planets.

### 2.38


sukha-duḥkhe same kṛtvā

lābhālābhau jayājayau

tato yuddhāya yujyasva

naivaṁ pāpam avāpsyasi

sukha—happiness; duḥkhe—in distress; same—in equanimity; kṛtvā—doing so;
lābhālābhau—both in loss and profit; jayājayau—both in defeat and victory;
tataḥ—thereafter; yuddhāya—for the sake of fighting; yujyasva—do fight;
na—never; evam—in this way; pāpam—sinful reaction; avāpsyasi—you will gain.

TRANSLATION

Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness or
distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat—and, by so doing, you shall never
incur sin.

PURPORT

Lord Kṛṣṇa now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of fighting
because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of happiness or
distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in the activities of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. That everything should be performed for the sake of Kṛṣṇa is
transcendental consciousness; so there is no reaction to material activities. He
who acts for his own sense gratification, either in goodness or in passion, is
subject to the reaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered
himself in the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of activities. It
is said:

devarṣi-bhutāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ na kiṅkaro nāyamṛṇī ca rājan sarvātmanā yaḥ
śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

(Bhag. 11.5.41)

“Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, giving up all other
duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone—not the demigods, nor
the sages, nor the people in general, nor kinsmen, nor humanity, nor
forefathers.” That is the indirect hint given by Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna in this verse,
and the matter will be more clearly explained in the following verses.

### 2.39


eṣā te ’bhihitā sāṅkhye

buddhir yoge tv imāṁ śṛṇu

buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha

karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

eṣā—all these; te—unto you; abhihitā—described; śāṅkhye—by analytical study;
buddhiḥ—intelligence; yoge—work without fruitive result; tu—but; imām—this;
śṛṇu—just hear; buddhyā—by intelligence; yuktaḥ—dovetailed; yayā—by which;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; karma-bandham—bondage of reaction; prahāsyasi—you can be
released from.

TRANSLATION

Thus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of sāṅkhya philosophy.
Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one works without fruitive result. O
son of Pṛthā, when you act by such intelligence, you can free yourself from the
bondage of works.

PURPORT

According to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, saṅkhya means that which
describes phenomena in detail, and saṅkhya refers to that philosophy which
describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga involves controlling the senses.
Arjuna’s proposal not to fight was based on sense gratification. Forgetting his
prime duty, he wanted to cease fighting because he thought that by not killing
his relatives and kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom by
conquering his cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. In both ways, the
basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived from conquering
them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are both on the basis of
persona1 sense gratification, for there is a sacrifice of wisdom and duty.
Kṛṣṇa, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that by killing the body of his
grandfather he would not be killing the soul proper, and He explained that all
individual persons, including the Lord Himself, are eternal individuals; they
were individuals in the past, they are individuals in the present, and they will
continue to remain individuals in the future, because all of us are individual
souls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in different manners.
But, actually, we keep our individuality even after liberation from the bondage
of material dress. An analytical study of the soul and the body has been very
graphically explained by Lord Kṛṣṇa. And this descriptive knowledge of the soul
and the body from different angles of vision has been described here as sāṅkhya,
in terms of the Nirukti dictionary. This sāṅkhya has nothing to do with the
sāṅkhya philosophy of the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter Kapila’s
sāṅkhya, the sāṅkhya philosophy was expounded in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by the
true Lord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who explained it to His mother,
Devahūti. It is clearly explained by Him that the Puruṣa, or the Supreme Lord,
is active and that He creates by looking over the prakṛti. This is accepted in
the Vedas and in the Gītā. The description in the Vedas indicates that the Lord
glanced over the prakṛti, or nature, and impregnated it with atomic individuals
souls. All these individuals are working in the material world for sense
gratification, and under the spell of material energy they are thinking of being
enjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the last point of liberation when the
living entity wants to become one with the Lord. This is the last snare of māyā
or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is only after many, many births of such
sense gratificatory activities that a great soul surrenders unto Vāsudeva, Lord
Kṛṣṇa, thereby fulfilling the search after the ultimate truth.

Arjuna has already accepted Kṛṣṇa as his spiritual master by surrendering
himself unto Him: śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam. Consequently, Kṛṣṇa
will now tell him about the working process in buddhi-yoga, or karma-yoga, or in
other words, the practice of devotional service only for the sense gratification
of the Lord. This buddhi-yoga is clearly explained in Chapter Ten, verse ten, as
being direct communion with the Lord, who is sitting as Paramātmā in everyone’s
heart. But such communion does not take place without devotional service. One
who is therefore situated in devotional or transcendental loving service to the
Lord, or, in other words, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, attains to this stage of
buddhi-yoga by the special grace of the Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that
only to those who are always engaged in devotional service out of transcendental
love does He award the pure knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the
devotee can reach Him easily in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.

Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional service of the
Lord, and the word sāṅkhya mentioned herein has nothing to do with the atheistic
sāṅkhya-yoga enunciated by the impostor Kapila. One should not, therefore,
misunderstand that the sāṅkhya-yoga mentioned herein has any connection with the
atheistic sāṅkhya. Nor did that philosophy have any influence during that time;
nor would Lord Kṛṣṇa care to mention such godless philosophical speculations.
Real sāṅkhya philosophy is described by Lord Kapila in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
but even that sāṅkhya has nothing to do with the current topics. Here, sāṅkhya
means analytical description of the body and the soul. Lord Kṛṣṇa made an
analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjuna to the point of
buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s sāṅkhya and Lord Kapila’s
sāṅkhya, as described in the Bhāgavatam; are one and the same. They are all
bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, that only the less intelligent class of men
make a distinction between sāṅkhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga.

Of course, atheistic sāṅkhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga, yet the
unintelligent claim that the atheistic sāṅkhya-yoga is referred to in the
Bhagavad-gītā.

One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service. One who
works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficult such work may be,
is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and finds himself always in
transcendental bliss. By such transcendental engagement, one achieves all
transcendental qualities automatically, by the grace of the Lord, and thus his
liberation is complete in itself, without his making extraneous endeavors to
acquire knowledge. There is much difference between work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
and work for fruitive results, especially in the matter of sense gratification
for achieving results in terms of family or material happiness. Buddhi-yoga is
therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we perform.
