### 2.40


nehābhikrama-nāśo ’sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt

na—there is not; iha—in this world; abhikrama—endeavoring; nāśaḥ—loss;
asti—there is; pratyavāyaḥ—diminution; na—never; vidyate—there is;
svalpam—little; api—although; asya—of this; dharmasya—of this occupation;
trāyate—releases; mahataḥ—of very great; bhayāt—from danger.

**TRANSLATION**

In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on
this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear.

**PURPORT**

Activity in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Kṛṣṇa without
expectation of sense gratification, is the highest transcendental quality of
work. Even a small beginning of such activity finds no impediment, nor can that
small beginning be lost at any stage. Any work begun on the material plane has
to be completed, otherwise the whole attempt becomes a failure. But any work
begun in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has a permanent effect, even though not finished.
The performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his work in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness bears
permanent results, so that the next beginning is from the point of two percent;
whereas, in material activity, without a hundred percent success, there is no
profit. Ajāmila performed his duty in some percentage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
but the result he enjoyed at the end was a hundred percent, by the grace of the
Lord. There is a nice verse in this connection in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajan na pakko ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ ko vārtha āpto ’bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

“If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing his work, what
loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if one performs his material
activities perfectly?” (Bhāg. 1.5.17) Or, as the Christians say, “What profiteth
a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss of his eternal soul?”

Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness carries the person again to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even after the
loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in the next life of
being born again as a human being, either in the family of a great cultured
brāhmaṇa or in a rich aristocratic family that will give one a further chance
for elevation. That is the unique quality of work done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 2.41


vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo ’vyavasāyinām

vyavasāyātmikā—resolute Kṛṣṇa consciousness; buddhiḥ—intelligence; ekā—only one;
iha—in this world; kuru-nandana—O beloved child of the Kurus;
bahu-śākhāḥ—various branches; hi—indeed; anantāḥ—unlimited; ca—also;
buddhayaḥ—intelligence; avyavasāyinām—of those who are not in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O
beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is
many-branched.

**PURPORT**

A strong faith in Kṛṣṇa consciousness that one should be elevated to the highest
perfection of life is called vyavasāyātmikā intelligence. The
Caitanya-caritāmṛta [Cc. Madhya 22.62] states:

‘śraddhā’-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta
haya

Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged in the
duties of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he need not act in relationship to the material
world with obligations to family traditions, humanity, or nationality. Fruitive
activities are the engagements of one’s reactions from past good or bad deeds.
When one is awake in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he need no longer endeavor for good
results in his activities. When one is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all
activities are on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to
dualities like good and bad. The highest perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
renunciation of the material conception of life. This state is automatically
achieved by progressive Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The resolute purpose of a person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is based on knowledge (“Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā
sudurlabhaḥ”) by which one comes to know perfectly that Vāsudeva, or Kṛṣṇa, is
the root of all manifested causes. As water on the root of a tree is
automatically distributed to the leaves and branches, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
one can render the highest service to everyone—namely self, family, society,
country, humanity, etc. If Kṛṣṇa is satisfied by one’s actions, then everyone
will be satisfied.

Service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is, however, best practiced under the able
guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa, who
knows the nature of the student and who can guide him to act in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness one has to act
firmly and obey the representative of Kṛṣṇa, and one should accept the
instruction of the bona fide spiritual master as one’s mission in life. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākur instructs us, in his famous prayers for the
spiritual master, as follows:

yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādānna gatiḥ kuto ’pi dhyāyaṁ stuvaṁs
tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam.

“By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master, there is no
chance of being promoted to the plane of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I should,
therefore, meditate and pray for his mercy three times a day, and offer my
respectful obeisances unto him, my spiritual master.”

The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soul beyond the
conception of the body—not theoretically but practically, when there is no
longer chance for sense gratification manifested in fruitive activities. One who
is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by various types of fruitive acts.

### 2.42-43


yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ

pravadanty avipaścitaḥ

veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha

nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā

janma-karma-phala-pradām

kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ

bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati

yām imām—all these; puṣpitām—flowery; vācam—words; pravadanti—say;
avipaścitaḥ—men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-vāda-ratāḥ—supposed
followers of the Vedas; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; na—never; anyat—anything else;
asti—there is; iti—this; vādinaḥ—advocates; kāma-ātmānaḥ—desirous of sense
gratification; svarga-parāḥ—aiming to achieve heavenly planets;
janma-karma-phala-pradām—resulting in fruitive action, good birth, etc.;
kriyā-viśeṣa—pompous ceremonies; bahulām—various; bhoga—sense enjoyment;
aiśvarya—opulence; gatim—progress; prati—towards.

**TRANSLATION**

Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the Vedas,
which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly planets,
resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense gratification
and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.

**PURPORT**

People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they are
most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa portions
of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than sense gratificatory proposals
for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are available and material
opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for
elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the jyotiṣṭoma sacrifices. In
fact, it is stated that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must
perform these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this
is the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such
inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees without
knowing the results of such attractions, similarly unenlightened men are
attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense enjoyment thereof.

In the karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas it is said that those who perform the
four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasa beverages to become
immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some are very eager to have
somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense gratifications. Such persons
have no faith in liberation from material bondage, and they are very much
attached to the pompous ceremonies of Vedic sacrifices. They are generally
sensual, and they do not want anything other than the heavenly pleasures of
life. It is understood that there are gardens called nandana-kānana in which
there is good opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and
having a profuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly
sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,
temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.

### 2.44


bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ

samādhau na vidhīyate

bhoga—material enjoyment; aiśvarya—opulence; prasaktānām—those who are so
attached; tayā—by such things; apahṛta-cetasām—bewildered in mind;
vyavasāyātmikā—fixed determination; buddhiḥ—devotional service of the Lord;
samādhau—in the controlled mind; na—never; vidhīyate—does take place.

**TRANSLATION**

In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination of
devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place.

**PURPORT**

Samādhi means “fixed mind.” The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says, samyag
ādhīyate ’sminn ātmatattva-yāthātmyam: “When the mind is fixed for understanding
the self, it is called samādhi. “Samādhi is never possible for persons
interested in material sense enjoyment, nor for those who are bewildered by such
temporary things. They are more or less condemned by the process of material
energy.

### 2.45


trai-guṇya-viṣayā vedā

nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna

nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho

niryoga-kṣema ātmavān

traiguṇya—pertaining to the three modes of material nature; viṣayāḥ—on the
subject matter; vedāḥ—Vedic literatures; nistraiguṇyaḥ—in a pure state of
spiritual existence; bhava—be; arjuna—O Arjuna; nirdvandvaḥ—free from the pains
of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthaḥ—ever remaining in sattva (goodness);
niryoga-kṣemaḥ—free from (the thought of) acquisition and preservation;
ātmavān—established in the Self.

**TRANSLATION**

The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature.
Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free from
all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in
the Self.

**PURPORT**

All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three modes of
material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which cause bondage in the
material world. The Vedas deal mostly with fruitive activities to gradually
elevate the general public from the field of sense gratification to a position
on the transcendental plane. Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Kṛṣṇa, is
advised to raise himself to the transcendental position of Vedānta philosophy
where, in the beginning, there is brahma-jijñāsā, or questions on the Supreme
Transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world are
struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after creation of the
material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to live and get rid of the
material entanglement. When the activities for sense gratification, namely the
karma-kāṇḍa chapter, are finished, then the chance for spiritual realization is
offered in the form of the Upaniṣads, which are part of different Vedas, as the
Bhagavad-gītā is a part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahābhārata. The Upaniṣads
mark the beginning of transcendental life.

As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in the
material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities such as
happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating such dualities
become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This transcendental position
is achieved in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness when one is fully dependant on the good
will of Kṛṣṇa.