### 2.59


viṣayā vinivartante

nirāhārasya dehinaḥ

rasa-varjaṁ raso ’py asya

paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate

viṣayāḥ—objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante—are practiced to be refrained
from; nirāhārasya—by negative restrictions; dehinaḥ—for the embodied;
rasa-varjam—giving up the taste; rasaḥ—sense of enjoyment; api—although there
is; asya—his; param—far superior things; dṛṣṭvā—by experiencing;
nivartate—ceases from.

**TRANSLATION**

The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste for
sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by experiencing a higher
taste, he is fixed in consciousness.

**PURPORT**

Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease from sense
enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment by rules and
regulations is something like restricting a diseased person from certain types
of eatables. The patient, however, neither likes such restrictions, nor loses
his taste for eatables. Similarly, sense restriction by some spiritual process
like aṣṭāṅga-yoga, in the matter of yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma, pratyāhāra,
dharaṇā, dhyāna, etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no
better knowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa,
in the course of his advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, no longer has a taste
for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for the less
intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life, but such
restrictions are only good if one actually has a taste for Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
When one is actually Kṛṣṇa conscious, he automatically loses his taste for pale
things.

### 2.60


yatato hy api kaunteya

puruṣasya vipaścitaḥ

indriyāṇi pramāthīni

haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

yatataḥ—while endeavoring; hi—certainly; api—in spite of; kaunteya—O son of
Kuntī; puruṣasya—of the man; vipaścitaḥ—full of discriminating knowledge;
indriyāṇi—the senses; pramāthīni—stimulated; haranti—throws forcefully;
prasabhaṁ—by force; manaḥ—the mind.

**TRANSLATION**

The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly carry away
the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring to control them.

**PURPORT**

There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who try to
conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even the greatest of them
sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment due to the agitated mind. Even
Viśvāmitra, a great sage and perfect yogī, was misled by Menakā into sex
enjoyment, although the yogī was endeavoring for sense control with severe types
of penance and yoga practice. And,of course, there are so many similar instances
in the history of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control the mind
and the senses without being fully Kṛṣṇa conscious. Without engaging the mind in
Kṛṣṇa, one cannot cease such material engagements. A practical example is given
by Śrī Yāmunācārya, a great saint and devotee, who says: “Since my mind has been
engaged in the service of the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and I have been enjoying
an ever new transcendental humor, whenever I think of sex life with a woman, my
face at once turns from it, and I spit at the thought.”

Kṛṣṇa consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing that automatically
material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a hungry man had satisfied
his hunger by a sufficient quantity of nutritious eatables. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa
also conquered a great yogī, Durvāsā Muni, simply because his mind was engaged
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 2.61


tāni sarvāṇi saṁyamya

yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

vaśe hi yasyendriyāṇi

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

tāni—those senses; sarvāṇi—all; saṁyamya—keeping under control; yuktaḥ—being
engaged; āsīta—being so situated; mat-paraḥ—in relationship with Me; vaśe—in
full subjugation; hi—certainly; yasya—one whose; indriyāṇi—senses; tasya—his;
prajñā—consciousness; pratiṣṭhitā—fixed.

**TRANSLATION**

One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me is known as a
man of steady intelligence.

**PURPORT**

That the highest conception of yoga perfection is Kṛṣṇa consciousness is clearly
explained in this verse. And, unless one is Kṛṣṇa conscious, it is not at all
possible to control the senses. As cited above, the great sage Durvāsā Muni
picked a quarrel with Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, and Durvāsā Muni unnecessarily became
angry out of pride and therefore could not check his senses. On the other hand,
the King, although not as powerful a yogī as the sage, but a devotee of the
Lord, silently tolerated all the sage’s injustices and thereby emerged
victorious. The King was able to control his senses because of the following
qualifications, as mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānavarṇane karau harer
mandira-mārjanādiṣu śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe’ṅga-saṅgamam ghrāṇaṁ ca
tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane kāmaṁ ca dāsye na
tu kāma-kāmyayā yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

“King Ambarīṣa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, engaged his words
in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the temple of the
Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the form
of the Lord, his body in touching the body of the devotee, his nostrils in
smelling the flavor of the flowers offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his
tongue in tasting the tulasī leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the
holy place where His temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto
the Lord, and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord … and all these
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-paraḥ devotee of the Lord.” (Bhāg.
9.4.18-20)

The word mat-paraḥ is most significant in this connection. How one can become a
mat-paraḥ is described in the life of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, a great scholar and ācārya in the line of the mat-paraḥ, remarks:
“mad-bhakti-prabhāvena sarvendriya-vijaya-pūrvikā svātma dṛṣṭiḥ sulabheti
bhāvaḥ.” “The senses can be completely controlled only by the strength of
devotional service to Kṛṣṇa.” Also the example of fire is sometimes given: “As
the small flames within burn everything within the room, similarly Lord Viṣṇu,
situated in the heart of the yogī, burns up all kinds of impurities.” The
Yoga-sūtra also prescribes meditation on Viṣṇu, and not meditation on the void.
The so-called yogīs who meditate on something which is not the Viṣṇu form simply
waste their time in a vain search after some phantasmagoria. We have to be Kṛṣṇa
conscious—devoted to the Personality of Godhead. This is the aim of the real
yoga.

### 2.62


dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ

saṅgas teṣūpajāyate

saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ

kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

dhyayataḥ—while contemplating; viṣayān—sense objects; puṁsaḥ—of the person;
saṅgaḥ—attachment; teṣu—in the sense objects; upajāyate—develops;
saṅgāt—attachment; sañjāyate—develops; kāmaḥ—desire; kāmāt—from desire;
krodhaḥ—anger; abhijāyate—becomes manifest.

**TRANSLATION**

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment for
them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.

**PURPORT**

One who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of senses. The senses require real engagements, and if
they are not engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, they will
certainly seek engagement in the service of materialism. In the material world
everyone, including Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā—to say nothing of other demigods
in the heavenly planets—is subjected to the influence of sense objects, and the
only method to get out of this puzzle of material existence is to become Kṛṣṇa
conscious. Lord Śiva was deep in meditation, but when Pārvatī agitated him for
sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a result Kārtikeya was born.
When Haridāsa Ṭhākur was a young devotee of the Lord, he was similarly allured
by the incarnation of Māyā Devī, but Haridāsa easily passed the test because of
his unalloyed devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa. As illustrated in the above-mentioned
verse of Śrī Yāmunācārya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material sense
enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in the association of
the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not, therefore, in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, however powerful he may be in controlling the senses by
artificial repression, is sure ultimately to fail, for the slightest thought of
sense pleasure will agitate him to gratify his desires.

### 2.63


krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ

sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ

smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo

buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

krodhāt—from anger; bhavati—takes place; saṁmohaḥ—perfect illusion;
saṁmohāt—from illusion; smṛti—of memory; vibhramaḥ—bewilderment;
smṛti-bhraṁśāt—after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nāśaḥ—loss of intelligence;
buddhi-nāśāt—and from loss of intelligence; praṇaśyati—falls down.

**TRANSLATION**

From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When
memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost, one
falls down again into the material pool.

**PURPORT**

By development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness one can know that everything has its use
in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as a result,
although they desire liberation from material bondage, they do not attain to the
perfect stage of renunciation. On the other hand, a person in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness knows how to use everything in the service of the Lord; therefore
he does not become a victim of material consciousness. For example, for an
impersonalist, the Lord, or the Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas
an impersonalist tries to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Kṛṣṇa is the
supreme enjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,
after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes the remnants, called
prasādam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized and there is no danger of a
downfall. The devotee takes prasādam in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whereas the
nondevotee rejects it as material. The impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy
life due to his artificial renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation
of the mind pulls him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said
that such a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls down
again due to his not having support in devotional service.

### 2.64


rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais tu

viṣayān indriyaiś caran

ātma-vaśyair vidheyātmā

prasādam adhigacchati

rāga—attachment; dveṣa—detachment; vimuktaiḥ—by one who has been free from such
things; tu—but; viṣayān—sense objects; indriyaiḥ—by the senses; caran—acting;
ātma-vaśyaiḥ—one who has control over; vidheyātmā—one who follows regulated
freedom; prasādam—the mercy of the Lord; adhigacchati—attains.

**TRANSLATION**

One who can control his senses by practicing the regulated principles of freedom
can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus become free from all
attachment and aversion.

**PURPORT**

It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by some
artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in the transcendental
service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall. Although the person in
full Kṛṣṇa consciousness may apparently be on the sensual plane, because of his
being Kṛṣṇa conscious, he has no attachment to sensual activities. The Kṛṣṇa
conscious person is concerned only with the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, and nothing
else. Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Kṛṣṇa wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Kṛṣṇa does not
want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily done for his own
satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within his control because he
acts only under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. This consciousness is the causeless
mercy of the Lord, which the devotee can achieve in spite of his being attached
to the sensual platform.

### 2.65


prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ

hānir asyopajāyate

prasanna-cetaso hy āśu

buddhiḥ paryavatiṣṭhate

prasāde—on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva—all;
duḥkhānām—material miseries; hāniḥ—destruction; asya—his; upajāyate—takes place;
prasanna-cetasaḥ—of the happy-minded; hi—certainly; āśu—very soon;
buddhiḥ—intelligence; pari—sufficiently; avatiṣṭhate—established.

**TRANSLATION**

For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold miseries
of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state, one’s intelligence
soon becomes steady.

