### 3.9


yajñārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra

loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya

mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara

yajña-arthāt—only for the sake of Yajña, or Viṣṇu; karmaṇaḥ—work done;
anyatra—otherwise; lokaḥ—this world; ayam—this; karma-bandhanaḥ—bondage by work;
tat—Him; artham—for the sake of; karma—work; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
mukta-saṅgaḥ—liberated from association; samācara—do it perfectly.

**TRANSLATION**

Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one
to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kuntī, perform your prescribed
duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached
and free from bondage.

**PURPORT**

Since one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are so made that
that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajña means Lord Viṣṇu, or sacrificial
performances. All sacrificial performances also are meant for the satisfaction
of Lord Viṣṇu. The Vedas enjoin: yajño vai viṣṇuḥ. In other words, the same
purpose is served whether one performs prescribed yajñas or directly serves Lord
Viṣṇu. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is therefore performance of yajña as it is prescribed
in this verse. The varṇāśrama institution also aims at this for satisfying Lord
Viṣṇu. “Varṇāśramācāra-vatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān/viṣṇur ārādhyate…” (Viṣṇu
Purāṇa 3.8.8) Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Viṣṇu. Any other
work done in this material world wilI be a cause of bondage, for both good and
evil work have their reactions, and any reaction binds the performer. Therefore,
one has to work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to satisfy Kṛṣṇa (or Viṣṇu); and while
performing such activities one is in a liberated stage. This is the great art of
doing work, and in the beginning this process requires very expert guidance. One
should therefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a devotee of
Lord Kṛṣṇa, or under the direct instruction of Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself (under whom
Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should be performed for sense
gratification, but everything should be done for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. This
practice will not only save one from the reaction of work, but will also
gradually elevate one to transcendental loving service of the Lord, which alone
can raise one to the kingdom of God.

### 3.10


saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā

purovāca prajāpatiḥ

anena prasaviṣyadhvam

eṣa vo ’stv iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk

saha—along with; yajñāḥ—sacrifices; prajāḥ—generations; sṛṣṭvā—by creating;
purā—anciently; uvāca—said; prajā-patiḥ—the Lord of creatures; anena—by this;
prasaviṣyadhvam—be more and more prosperous; eṣaḥ—certainly; vaḥ—your; astu—let
it be; iṣṭa—all desirable; kāma-dhuk—bestower.

**TRANSLATION**

In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations
of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Viṣṇu, and blessed them by
saying, “Be thou happy by this yajña [sacrifice] because its performance will
bestow upon you all desirable things.”

**PURPORT**

The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Viṣṇu) is a chance offered to
the conditioned souls to come back home—back to Godhead. All living entities
within the material creation are conditioned by material nature because of their
forgetfulness of their relationship to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Vedic principles are to help us understand this eternal relation as
it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ. The Lord
says that the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it
is said: patiṁ viśvasyātmeśvaram. Therefore, the Lord of the living entities is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also Śrīla
Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the Lord as pati in so many ways:

śriyaḥ-patir yajña-patiḥ prajā-patir dhiyāṁ patir loka-patir dharā-patiḥ patir
gatiś cāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatāṁ prasīdatāṁ me bhagavān satāṁ patiḥ

(Bhāg. 2.4.20)

The prajā-pati is Lord Viṣṇu, and He is the Lord of all living creatures, all
worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone. The Lord created this
material world for the conditioned souls to learn how to perform yajñas
(sacrifice) for the satisfaction of Viṣṇu, so that while in the material world
they can live very comfortably without anxiety. Then after finishing the present
material body, they can enter into the kingdom of God. That is the whole program
for the conditioned soul. By performance of yajña, the conditioned souls
gradually become Kṛṣṇa conscious and become godly in all respects. In this age
of Kali, the saṅkīrtana-yajña (the chanting of the names of God) is recommended
by the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was introduced by Lord
Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age. Saṅkīrtana-yajña and Kṛṣṇa
consciousness go well together. Lord Kṛṣṇa in His devotional form (as Lord
Caitanya) is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as follows, with special
reference to the saṅkīrtana-yajña:

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇāṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair
yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

“In this age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient intelligence will
worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His associates, by performance of
saṅkīrtana-yajña.” (Bhāg. 11.5.29) Other yajñas prescribed in the Vedic
literatures are not easy to perform in this age of Kali, but the
saṅkīrtana-yajña is easy and sublime for all purposes.

### 3.11


devān bhāvayatānena

te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ

parasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ

śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha

devān—demigods; bhāvayata—having been pleased; anena—by this sacrifice;
te—those; devāḥ—the demigods; bhāvayantu—will please; vaḥ—you;
parasparam—mutual; bhāvayantaḥ—pleasing one another; sreyaḥ—benediction;
param—the supreme; avāpsyatha—do you achieve.

**TRANSLATION**

The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus nourishing
one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.

**PURPORT**

The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The supply of
air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintaining the body and soul
of every living entity are entrusted to the demigods, who are innumerable
assistants in different parts of the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Their pleasures and displeasures are dependant on the performance of yajñas by
the human being. Some of the yajñas are meant to satisfy particular demigods;
but even in so doing, Lord Viṣṇu is worshiped in all yajñas as the chief
beneficiary. It is stated also in the Bhagavad-gītā that Kṛṣṇa Himself is the
beneficiary of all kinds of yajñas: bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasām. Therefore, ultimate
satisfaction of the yajñapati is the chief purpose of all yajñas. When these
yajñas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in charge of the
different departments of supply are pleased, and there is no scarcity in the
supply of natural products.

Performance of yajñas has many side benefits, ultimately leading to liberation
from the material bondage. By performance of yajñas, all activities become
purified, as it is stated in the Vedas:

āhāra-śuddhau sattva-śuddhiḥ sattva-śuddhau dhruvā smṛtiḥ smṛti-lambhe
sarva-granthīnāṁ vipra-mokṣaḥ

As it will be explained in the following verse, by performance of yajña, one’s
eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctified foodstuffs, one’s very
existence becomes purified; by the purification of existence, finer tissues in
the memory become sanctified, and when memory is sanctified, one can think of
the path of liberation, and all these combined together lead to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, the great necessity of present-day society.

### 3.12


iṣṭān bhogān hi vo devā

dāsyante yajña-bhāvitāḥ

tair dattān apradāyaibhyo

yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ

iṣṭān—desired; bhogān—necessities of life; hi—certainly; vaḥ—unto you; devāḥ—the
demigods; dāsyante—award; yajña-bhāvitāḥ—being satisfied by the performance of
sacrifices; taiḥ—by them; dattān—things given; apradāya—without offering;
ebhyaḥ—to the demigods; yaḥ—he who; bhuṅkte—enjoys; stenaḥ—thief; eva—certainly;
saḥ—is he.

**TRANSLATION**

In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being satisfied by
the performance of yajña [sacrifice], supply all necessities to man. But he who
enjoys these gifts, without offering them to the demigods in return, is
certainly a thief.

**PURPORT**

The demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by the
performance of prescribed yajñas. In the Vedas, there are different kinds of
yajñas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are ultimately
offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who cannot understand
what the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to the demigods is recommended.
According to the different material qualities of the persons concerned,
different types of yajñas are recommended in the Vedas. Worship of different
demigods is also on the same basis—namely, according to different qualities. For
example, the meat-eaters are recommended to worship the goddess Kālī, the
ghastly form of material nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of animals
is recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Viṣṇu is recommended. But ultimately, all yajñas are
meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position. For ordinary men, at
least five yajñas, known as pañca-mahāyajña, are necessary.

One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that the human
society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord. No one can
manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables of human society.
These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk, sugar, etc., for the
persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for the nonvegetarians, like
meats, etc., none of which can be manufactured by men. Then again, take for
example heat, light, water, air, etc., which are also necessities of life—none
of them can be manufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord,
there can be no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., without
which no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependant on supplies from the
Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require so many raw materials
like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so many essentials—all of which are
supplied by the agents of the Lord, with the purpose that we should make proper
use of them to keep ourselves fit and healthy for the purpose of
self-realization, leading to the ultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from
the material struggle for existence. This aim of life is attained by performance
of yajñas. If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies from
the agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and more
entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation, certainly
we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the laws of material nature.
A society of thieves can never be happy because they have no aim in life. The
gross materialist thieves have no ultimate goal of life. They are simply
directed to sense gratification; nor do they have knowledge of how to perform
yajñas. Lord Caitanya, however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajña,
namely the saṅkīrtana-yajña, which can be performed by anyone in the world who
accepts the principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.13


yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo

mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ

bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpā

ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt

yajña-śiṣṭa—food taken after performance of yajña; aśinaḥ—eaters; santaḥ—the
devotees; mucyante—get relief from; sarva—all kinds of; kilbiṣaiḥ—sins;
bhuñjate—enjoy; te—they; tu—but; agham—grievous sins; pāpāḥ—sinners; ye—those;
pacanti—prepare food; ātma-kāraṇāt—for sense enjoyment.

**TRANSLATION**

The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat
food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food for personal
sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.

**PURPORT**

The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
are called santas, and they are always in love with the Lord as it is described
in the Brahma-saṁhitā: premāñjana- cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva
hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti. The santas, being always in a compact of love with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda
(the giver of liberation), or Kṛṣṇa (the all-attractive person), cannot accept
anything without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore, such
devotees always perform yajñas in different modes of devotional service, such as
śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, arcanam, etc., and these performances of yajñas
keep them always aloof from all kinds of contamination of sinful association in
the material world. Others, who prepare food for self or sense gratification,
are not only thieves, but are also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How can a
person be happy if he is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible. Therefore,
in order for people to become happy in all respects, they must be taught to
perform the easy process of saṅkīrtana-yajña, in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in the world.
