### 11.20


dyāv ā-pṛthivyor idam antaraṁ hi

vyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśaś ca sarvāḥ

dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ

loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman

dyau—in outer space; āpṛthivyoḥ—of the earth; idam—this; antaram—in between;
hi—certainly; vyāptam—pervaded; tvayā—by You; ekena—by one; diśaḥ—directions;
ca—and; sarvāḥ—all; dṛṣṭvā—by seeing; adbhutam—wonderful; rūpam—form;
ugram—terrible; tava—Your; idam—this; loka—planetary system; trayam—three;
pravyathitam—perturbed; mahātman—O great one.

**TRANSLATION**

Although You are one, You are spread throughout the sky and the planets and all
space between. O great one, as I behold this terrible form, I see that all the
planetary systems are perplexed.

**PURPORT**

Dyāv āpṛthivyoḥ (the space between heaven and earth) and lokatrayam (three
worlds) are significant words in this verse because it appears that not only
Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord, but others in other planetary
systems also saw it. The vision was not a dream. All who were spiritually awake
with the divine vision saw it.

### 11.21


amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśanti

kecid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇanti

svastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ

stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ

amī—all those; hi—certainly; tvām—unto You; sura-saṅghāḥ—groups of demigods;
viśanti—entering; kecit—some of them; bhītāḥ—out of fear; prāñjalayaḥ—with
folded hands; gṛṇanti—offering prayers unto; svasti—all peace; iti—thus;
uktvā—speaking like that; maharṣi—great sages; siddha-saṅghāḥ—perfect sages;
stuvanti—singing hymns; tvām—unto You; stutibhiḥ—with prayers; puṣkalābhiḥ—Vedic
hymns.

**TRANSLATION**

All the demigods are surrendering and entering into You. They are very much
afraid, and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.

**PURPORT**

The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific manifestation of
the universal form and its glowing effulgence and so prayed for protection.

### 11.22


rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā

viśve ’śvinau marutaś coṣmapāś ca

gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā

vīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāś caiva sarve

rudra—manifestations of Lord Śiva; ādityāḥ—the Ādityas; vasavaḥ—the Vasus;
ye—all those; ca—and; sādhyāḥ—the Sādhyas; viśve—the Viśvadevas; aśvinau—the
Aśvinīkumāras; marutaḥ—the Maruts; ca—and; uṣmapāḥ—the forefathers; ca—and;
gandharva—the Gandharvas; yakṣa—the Yakṣas; asura-siddha—the demons and the
perfected demigods; saṅghāḥ—assemblies; vīkṣante—are seeing; tvām—You;
vismitāḥ—in wonder; ca—also; eva—certainly; sarve—all.

**TRANSLATION**

The different manifestations of Lord Śiva, the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Sādhyas,
the Viśvadevas, the two Aśvins, the Māruts, the forefathers and the Gandharvas,
the Yakṣas, Asuras, and all perfected demigods are beholding You in wonder.

### 11.23


rūpaṁ mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraṁ

mahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādam

bahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ

dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham

rūpam—form; mahat—very great; te—of You; bahu—many; vaktra—faces; netram—eyes;
mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; bahu—many; bāhu—arms; ūru—thighs; pādam—legs;
bahu-udaram—many bellies; babu-daṁṣṭrā—many teeth; karālam—horrible;
dṛṣṭvā—seeing; lokāḥ—all the planets; pravyathitāḥ—perturbed; tathā—similarly;
aham—I.

**TRANSLATION**

O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at seeing
Your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and Your terrible teeth, and as
they are disturbed, so am I.


### 11.24


nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ

vyāttānanaṁ dīpta-viśāla-netram

dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmā

dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi śamaṁ ca viṣṇo

nabhaḥ spṛśam—touching the sky; dīptam—glowing; aneka—many; varṇam—color;
vyāttā—open; ānanam—mouth; dīpta—glowing; viśāla—very great; netram—eyes;
dṛṣṭvā—by seeing; hi—certainly; tvām—You; pravyathitā—perturbed; antaḥ—within;
ātmā—soul; dhṛtim—steadiness; na—no; vindāmi—and have; śamam—mental tranquility;
ca—also; viṣṇo—O Lord Viṣṇu.

**TRANSLATION**

O all-pervading Viṣṇu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium. Seeing Your
radiant colors fill the skies and beholding Your eyes and mouths, I am afraid.

### 11.25


daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni

dṛṣṭvaiva kālānala-sannibhāni

diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma

prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa

daṁṣṭrā—teeth; karālāni—like that; ca—also; te—Your; mukhāni—faces;
dṛṣṭvā—seeing; eva—thus; kālānala—the fire of death; sannibhāni—as if blazing;
diśaḥ—directions; na jāne—do not know; na labhe—nor obtain; ca śarma—and grace;
prasīda—be pleased; deveśa—O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivāsa—refuge of the
worlds.

**TRANSLATION**

O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot keep
my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all
directions I am bewildered.

### 11.26-27


amī ca tvāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ

sarve sahaivāvani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ

bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau

sahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ

vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti

daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni

kecid vilagnā daśanāntareṣu

sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ

amī—all those; ca—also; tvām—You; dhṛtarāṣṭasya—of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; putrāḥ—sons;
sarva—all; saha eva—along with; avanipāla—warrior kings; saṅghaiḥ—with the
groups; bhīṣmaḥ—Bhīṣmadeva; droṇaḥ—Droṇācārya; sūta-putraḥ—Karṇa; tathā—also;
asau—that; saha—with; asmadīyaiḥ—our; api—also; yodha-mukhyaiḥ—chief among the
warriors; vaktrāṇi—mouths; te—Your; tvaramāṇāḥ—fearful; viśanti—entering;
daṁṣṭrā—teeth; karālāni—terrible; bhayānakāni—very fearful; kecit—some of them;
vilagnāḥ—being attacked; daśanāntareṣu—between the teeth; sandṛśyante—being
seen; cūrṇitaiḥ—smashed; uttama-aṅgaiḥ—by the head.

**TRANSLATION**

All the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra along with their allied kings, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa and
Karṇa, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your mouths, their heads smashed by
Your fearful teeth. I see that some are being crushed between Your teeth as
well.

**PURPORT**

In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would by very
interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the opposite party
(Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa and all the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra) and their soldiers and
Arjuna’s own soldiers are all being annihilated. This is an indication that
Arjuna will emerge victorious in battle, despite heavy losses on both sides. It
is also mentioned here that Bhīṣma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will
also be smashed. So also Karṇa. Not only will the great warriors of the other
party like Bhīṣma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna’s side
also.

### 11.28


yathā nadīnāṁ bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥ

samudram evābhimukhā dravanti

tathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrā

viśanti vaktrāṇy abhivijvalanti

yathā—as; nadīnām—of the rivers; bahavaḥ—many; ambu-vegāḥ—waves of the waters;
samudram—ocean; eva—certainly; abhimukhāḥ—towards; dravanti—gliding;
tathā—similarly; tava—Your; amī—all those; nara-lokavīrāḥ—the kings of human
society; viśanti—entering; vaktrāṇi—into the mouths; abhivijvalanti—blazing.

**TRANSLATION**

As the rivers flow into the sea, so all these great warriors enter Your blazing
mouths and perish.

### 11.29


yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā

viśanti nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥ

tathaiva nāśāya viśanti lokās

tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ

yathā—as; pradīptam—blazing; jvalanam—fire; pataṅgāḥ—moths; viśanti—enters;
nāśāya—destruction; samṛddha—full; vegāḥ—speed; tathā eva—similarly; nāśāya—for
destruction; viśanti—entering; lokāḥ—all people. tava—unto You; api—also;
vaktrāṇi—in the mouths; samṛddha-vegāḥ—with full speed.

**TRANSLATION**

I see all people rushing with full speed into Your mouths as moths dash into a
blazing fire.

### 11.30


lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl

lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ

tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ

bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo

lelihyase—licking; grasamānaḥ—devouring; samantāt—from all directions;
lokān—people; samagrān—completely; vadanaiḥ—by the mouth; jvaladbhiḥ—with
blazing; tejobhiḥ—by effulgence; āpūrya—covering; jagat—the universe;
samagram—all; bhāsaḥ—illuminating; tava—Your; ugrāḥ—terrible;
pratapanti—scorching; viṣṇo—O all-pervading Lord.

**TRANSLATION**

O Viṣṇu, I see You devouring all people in Your flaming mouths and covering the
universe with Your immeasurable rays. Scorching the worlds, You are manifest.

### 11.31


ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo

namo ’stu te deva-vara prasīda

vijñātum icchāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ

na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim

	    ākhyāhi—please explain; me—unto me; kaḥ—who; bhavān—You;
	    ugra-rūpaḥ—fierce form; namaḥ astu—obeisances; te—unto You;
	    deva-vara—the great one amongst the demigods; prasīda—be gracious;
	    vijñātum—just to know; icchāmi—I wish; bhavantam—You; ādyam—the
	    original; na—never; hi—certainly; prajānāmi—do I know; tava—Your;
	    pravṛttim—mission.

**TRANSLATION**

O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer my
obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. I do not know what Your mission
is, and I desire to hear of it.

### 11.32


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho

lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ

ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve

ye ’vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Personality of Godhead said; kālaḥ—time; asmi—I am;
loka—the worlds; kṣaya-kṛt—destroyer; pravṛddhaḥ—to engage; lokān—all people;
samāhartum—to destroy; iha—in this world; pravṛttaḥ—to engage; ṛte api—without
even; tvām—you; na—never; bhaviṣyanti—will be; sarve—all; ye—who;
avasthitāḥ—situated; pratyanīkeṣu—on the opposite side; yodhāḥ—the soldiers.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and I have come to
engage all people. With the exception of you [the Pāṇḍavas], all the soldiers
here on both sides will be slain.

**PURPORT**

Although Arjuna knew that Kṛṣṇa was his friend and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he was nonetheless puzzled by the various forms exhibited by Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating force.
It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything, even
Brahmā. Yasya brahme ca kṣatram ca ubhe bhavata odanaḥ/mṛtyur yasyopasecanaṁ ka
itthā veda yatra saḥ. Eventually all the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and everyone else
are devoured by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is an all-devouring
giant, and here Kṛṣṇa presents Himself in that form of all-devouring time.
Except for a few Pāṇḍavas, everyone who was present in that battlefield would be
devoured by Him.

Arjuna was not in favor of the fight, and he thought it was better not to fight;
then there would be no frustration. In reply, the Lord is saying that even if he
did not fight, every one of them would be destroyed, for that is His plan. If he
stopped fighting, they would die in another way. Death cannot be checked, even
if he did not fight. In fact, they were already dead. Time is destruction, and
all manifestations are to be vanquished by the desire of the Supreme Lord. That
is the law of nature.
