### 11.48


na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair

na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ

evaṁ-rūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛ-loke

draṣṭuṁ tvad anyena kuru-pravīra

na—never; veda—Vedic study; yajña—sacrifice; adhyayanaiḥ—studying; na dānaiḥ—by
charity; na—never; ca—also; kriyābhiḥ—by pious activities; na tapobhiḥ—by
serious penances; ugraiḥ—severe; evam—thus; rūpaḥ—form; śakyaḥ—can be seen;
aham—I; nṛloke—in this material world; draṣṭum—to see; tvat—you; anyena—by
another; kuru-pravīra—O best among the Kuru warriors.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal form
of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices, nor by
charities or similar activities can this form be seen. Only you have seen this.

**PURPORT**

The divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who can have
divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the status of divinity as
a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what is a demigod? It is stated in
the Vedic scriptures that those who are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu are demigods.
Those who are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Viṣṇu, or who only
recognize the impersonal part of Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme, cannot have the divine
vision. It is not possible to decry Kṛṣṇa and at the same time have the divine
vision. One cannot have the divine vision without becoming divine. In other
words, those who have divine vision can also see like Arjuna.

The Bhagavad-gītā gives the description of the universal form, and this
description was unknown to everyone before Arjuna. Now one can have some idea of
the viśva-rūpa after this incidence; those who are actually divine can see the
universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divine without being a pure
devotee of Kṛṣṇa. The devotees, however, who are actually in the divine nature
and who have divine vision, are not very much interested to see the universal
form of the Lord. As described in the previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the
four-handed form of Lord Kṛṣṇa as Viṣṇu, and he was actually afraid of the
universal form.

In this verse there are some significant words, just like veda-yajñādhya-yanaiḥ,
which refers to studying Vedic literature and the subject matter of sacrificial
regulations. Veda refers to all kinds of Vedic literature, namely the four Vedas
(Ṛk, Yajus, Sāma and Atharva) and the eighteen Purāṇas and Upaniṣads, and
Vedānta-sūtra. One can study these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there
are sūtras, Kalpa-sūtras and Mīmāṁsā-sūtras, for studying the method of
sacrifice. Dānaiḥ refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party. such
as those who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, the
brāhmaṇas and the Vaiṣṇavas. Similarly, pious activities refer to the
agni-hotra, etc., the prescribed duties of the different castes. Pious
activities and the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains are called tapasya.
So one can perform all these, can accept bodily penances, give charity, study
the Vedas, etc., but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it is not possible to
see that universal form. Those who are impersonalists are also imagining that
they are seeing the universal form of the Lord, but from Bhagavad-gītā we
understand that the impersonalists are not devotees. Therefore they are unable
to see the universal form of the Lord.

There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim an ordinary
human to be an incarnation, but this is all foolishness. We should follow the
principles of Bhagavad-gītā, otherwise there is no possibility of attaining
perfect spiritual knowledge. Although Bhagavad-gītā is considered the
preliminary study of the science of God, still it is so perfect that one can
distinguish what is what. The followers of a pseudo incarnation may say that
they have also seen the transcendental incarnation of God, the universal form,
but that is not acceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one
becomes a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, one cannot see the universal form of God. So one
first of all has to become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa; then he can claim that he
can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of Kṛṣṇa cannot
accept false incarnations or followers of false incarnations.

### 11.49


mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo

dṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ ghoram īdṛṅ mamedam

vyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaṁ

tad eva me rūpam idaṁ prapaśya

mā—let it not be; te—unto you; vyathā—trouble; mā—let it not be; ca—also;
vimūḍha-bhāvaḥ—bewilderment; dṛṣṭvā—by seeing; rūpam—form; ghoram—horrible;
īdṛk—like this; mama—My; idam—as it is; vyapetabhīḥ—just become free from all
fear; prīta-manāḥ—be pleased in mind; punaḥ—again; tvam—you; tat—that; eva—thus;
me—My; rūpam—form; idam—this; prapaśya—just see.

**TRANSLATION**

Your mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of Mine. Now let
it be finished. My devotee, be free from all disturbance. With a peaceful mind
you can now see the form you desire.

**PURPORT**

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna was worried about killing Bhīṣma and
Droṇa, his worshipful grandfathers and masters. But Kṛṣṇa said that he need not
be afraid of killing his grandfather. When they tried to disrobe Draupadī in the
assembly, Bhīṣma and Droṇa were silent, and for such negligence of duty they
should be killed. Kṛṣṇa showed His universal form to Arjuna just to show him
that these people were already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was
shown to Arjuna because devotees are always peaceful, and they cannot perform
such horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal form was
shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Kṛṣṇa showed him. A
devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for it does not enable one
to reciprocate loving feelings. A devotee wants to offer his respectful
worshiping feelings; thus he wants to see the two-handed or four-handed Kṛṣṇa
form so he can reciprocate in loving service with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

### 11.50


sañjaya uvāca

ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā

svakaṁ rūpaṁ darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ

āśvāsayām āsa ca bhītam enaṁ

bhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; iti—thus; arjunam—unto Arjuna; vāsudevaḥ—Kṛṣṇa;
tathā—that way; uktvā—saying; svakam—His own; rūpam—form; darśayāmāsa—showed;
bhūyaḥ—again; āśvāsayāmāsa—also convinced him; ca—also; bhītam—fearful;
enam—him; bhūtvā punaḥ—becoming again; saumya-vapuḥ—beautiful form; mahātmā—the
great one.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, while
speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, and at last He
showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna.

**PURPORT**

When Kṛṣṇa appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devakī, He first of all appeared
as four-armed Nārāyaṇa, but when He was requested by His parents, He transformed
Himself into an ordinary child in appearance. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa knew that Arjuna
was not interested in seeing a four-handed form of Kṛṣṇa, but since he asked to
see this four-handed form, He also showed him this form again and then showed
Himself in His two-handed form. The word saumya-vapuḥ is very significant.
Saumya-vapu is a very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form.
When He was present, everyone was attracted simply by Kṛṣṇa’s form, and because
Kṛṣṇa is director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna, His
devotee, and showed him again His beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa. In the Brahma-saṁhitā
it is stated that only a person whose eyes are smeared with the ointment of love
can see the beautiful form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.51


arjuna uvāca

dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ

tava saumyaṁ janārdana

idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ

sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; dṛṣṭvā—seeing; idam—this; mānuṣam—human being;
rūpam—form; tava—Your; saumyam—very beautiful; janārdana—O chastiser of the
enemies; idānīm—just now; asmi—I am; saṁvṛttaḥ—settled; sa-cetāḥ—in my
consciousness; prakṛtim—my own; gataḥ—I am.

**TRANSLATION**

When Arjuna thus saw Kṛṣṇa in His original form, he said: Seeing this humanlike
form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified, and I am restored to my
original nature.

**PURPORT**

Here the words mānuṣaṁ rūpam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary person are
shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. If Kṛṣṇa is like an ordinary
human being, then how is it possible for Him to show the universal form and
again to show the four-handed Nārāyaṇa form? So it is very clearly stated in
Bhagavad-gītā that one who thinks that Kṛṣṇa is an ordinary person and misguides
the reader by claiming that it is the impersonal Brahman within Kṛṣṇa speaking,
is doing the greatest injustice. Kṛṣṇa has actually shown His universal form and
His fourhanded Viṣṇu form. So how can He be an ordinary human being? A pure
devotee is not confused by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā because he
knows what is what. The original verses of Bhagavad-gītā are as clear as the
sun; they do not require lamplight from foolish commentators.

### 11.52


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ

dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama

devā apy asya rūpasya

nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; sudur-darśana- very
difficult to be seen; idam—this; rūpam—form; dṛṣṭavān asi—as you have seen;
yat—which; mama—of Mine; devāḥ—the demigods; api asya—also this; rūpasya—of the
form; nityam—eternally; darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ—always aspire to see.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, the form which you are now seeing is very
difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seeking the opportunity to see
this form which is so dear.

**PURPORT**

In the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Kṛṣṇa concluded revealing His
universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is not possible to be seen by
so many activities, sacrifices, etc. Now here the word sudurdarśam is used,
indicating that Kṛṣṇa’s two-handed form is still more confidential. One may be
able to see the universal form of Kṛṣṇa by adding a little tinge of devotional
service to various activities like penance, Vedic study and philosophical
speculation, etc. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti, one cannot
see; that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, the
form of Kṛṣṇa as a two-handed man is still more difficult to see, even for
demigods like Brahmā and Lord Śiva. They desire to see Him, and we have
evidences in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that when He was supposed to be in the womb
of His mother, Devakī, all the demigods from heaven came to see the marvel of
Kṛṣṇa. They even waited to see Him. A foolish person may deride Him, but that is
an ordinary person. Kṛṣṇa is actually desired to be seen by demigods like Brahmā
and Śiva in His two-armed form.

In Bhagavad-gītā it is also confirmed that He is not visible to the foolish
persons who deride Him. Kṛṣṇa’s body, as confirmed by Brahmā-saṁhitā and
confirmed by Himself in Bhagavad-gītā, is completely spiritual and full of bliss
and eternality. His body is never like a material body. But for some who make a
study of Kṛṣṇa by reading Bhagavad-gītā or similar Vedic scriptures, Kṛṣṇa is a
problem. For one using a material process, Kṛṣṇa is considered to be a great
historical personality and very learned philosopher. But He isn’t an ordinary
man. But some think that even though He was so powerful, He had to accept a
material body. Ultimately they think that the Absolute Truth is impersonal;
therefore they think that from His impersonal feature He assumed a personal
feature attached to material nature. This is a materialistic calculation of the
Supreme Lord. Another calculation is speculative. Those who are in search of
knowledge also speculate on Kṛṣṇa and consider Him to be less important than the
universal form of the Supreme. Thus some think that the universal form of Kṛṣṇa
which was manifested to Arjuna is more important than His personal form.
According to them, the personal form of the Supreme is something imaginary. They
believe that in the ultimate issue, the Absolute Truth is not a person. But the
transcendental process is described in Bhagavad-gītā, Chapter Two: to hear about
Kṛṣṇa from authorities. That is the actual Vedic process, and those who are
actually in the Vedic line hear about Kṛṣṇa from authority, and by repeated
hearing about Him, Kṛṣṇa becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Kṛṣṇa
is covered by His yoga-māyā potency. He is not to be seen or revealed to anyone
and everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He be seen. This is
confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is a surrendered soul, the Absolute
Truth can actually be understood. The transcendentalist, by continuous Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and by devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, can have his spiritual eyes
opened and can see Kṛṣṇa by revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even
for the demigods; therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand
Kṛṣṇa, and the advanced demigods are always in hope of seeing Kṛṣṇa in His
two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see the universal form of
Kṛṣṇa is very, very difficult and not possible for anyone and everyone, it is
still more difficult to understand His personal form as Śyāmasundara.

### 11.53


nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā

na dānena na cejyayā

śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ

dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā

na—never; aham—I; vedaiḥ—by study of the Vedas; na—never; tapasā—by serious
penances; na—never; dānena—by charity; na—never; ca—also; ijyayā—by worship;
śakyaḥ—is it possible; evam-vidhaḥ—like this; draṣṭum—to see; dṛṣṭavān—seeing;
asi—you are; mām—Me; yathā—as.

**TRANSLATION**

The form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood
simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious penances, nor by
charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that one can see Me as I am.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa first appeared before His parents Devakī and Vasudeva in a four-handed
form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed form. This mystery is
very difficult to understand for those who are atheists or who are devoid of
devotional service. For scholars who have simply studied Vedic literature by way
of speculation or out of mere academic interest, Kṛṣṇa is not easy to
understand. Nor is He to he understood by persons who officially go to the
temple to offer worship. They make their visit, but they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa
as He is. Kṛṣṇa can be understood only through the path of devotional service,
as explained by Kṛṣṇa Himself in the next verse.
