### 11.54


bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya

aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna

jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena

praveṣṭuṁ ca parantapa

bhaktyā—by devotional service; tu—but; ananyayā—without being mixed with
fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; śakyaḥ—possible; aham—I;
evam-vidhaḥ—like this; arjuna—O Arjuna; jñātum—to know; draṣṭum—to see;
tattvena—in fact; praveṣṭum—and to enter into; ca—also; parantapa—O mighty-armed
one.

**TRANSLATION**

My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I
am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can you
enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional service. He
explicitly explains this in this verse so unauthorized commentators, who try to
understand Bhagavad-gītā by the speculative process, will know that they are
simply wasting their time. No one can understand Kṛṣṇa or how He came from
parents in a four-handed form and at once changed Himself into a two-handed
form. It is clearly stated here that no one can see Him. Those who, however, are
very experienced students of Vedic literature can learn about Him from the Vedic
literature in so many ways. There are so many rules and regulations, and if one
at all wants to understand Kṛṣṇa, he must follow the regulative principles
described in the authoritative literature. One can perform penance in accordance
with those principles. As far as charity is concerned, it is plain that charity
should be given to the devotees of Kṛṣṇa who are engaged in His devotional
service to spread the Kṛṣṇa philosophy or Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout the
world. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya was
appreciated by Rūpa Gosvāmī as the most munificent man of charity because love
of Kṛṣṇa, which is very difficult to achieve, was distributed freely by Him. And
if one worships as prescribed in the temple (in the temples in India there is
always some statue, usually of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa), that is a chance to progress.
For the beginners in devotional service to the Lord, temple worship is very
essential, and this is confirmed in the Vedic literature.

One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directed by the
spiritual master can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead by revelation. For
one who does not take personal training under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master, it is impossible to even begin to understand Kṛṣṇa. The word
tu is specifically used here to indicate that no other process can be used, can
be recommended, or can be successful in understanding Kṛṣṇa.

The personal forms of Kṛṣṇa, the two-handed form and the four-handed, are
completely different from the temporary universal form shown to Arjuna. The
four-handed form is Nārāyaṇa, and the two-handed form is Kṛṣṇa; they are eternal
and transcendental, whereas the universal form exhibited to Arjuna is temporary.
The very word sudurdarśam, meaning difficult to see, suggests that no one saw
that universal form. It also suggests that amongst the devotees there was no
necessity of showing it. That form was exhibited by Kṛṣṇa at the request of
Arjuna because in the future, when one represents himself as an incarnation of
God, people can ask to see his universal form.

Kṛṣṇa changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of Nārāyaṇa and
then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicates that the four-handed
forms and other forms mentioned in Vedic literature are all emanations of the
original two-handed Kṛṣṇa. He is the origin of all emanations. Kṛṣṇa is distinct
even from these forms, not to speak of the impersonal conception. As far as the
four-handed forms of Kṛṣṇa are concerned, it is stated clearly that even the
most identical four-handed form of Kṛṣṇa (which is known as Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is
lying on the cosmic ocean and from whose breathing so many innumerable universes
are passing out and entering) is also an expansion of the Supreme Lord.
Therefore one should conclusively worship the personal form of Kṛṣṇa as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is eternity, bliss and knowledge. He is the
source of all forms of Viṣṇu, He is the source of all forms of incarnation, and
He is the original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā.

In the Vedic literature it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth is a
person. His name is Kṛṣṇa, and He sometimes descends on this earth. Similarly,
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there is a description of all kinds of incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there it is said that Kṛṣṇa is not an
incarnation of God but is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.
Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Similarly, in Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says, mattaḥ
parataram nānyāt: “There is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of
Godhead Kṛṣṇa.” He also says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā, aham ādir hi devānām:
“I am the origin of all the demigods.” And after understanding Bhagavad-gītā
from Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna also confirms this in the following words: paraṁ brahma paraṁ
dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān: “I now fully understand that You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of
everything.” Therefore the universal form which Kṛṣṇa showed to Arjuna is not
the original form of God. The original is the Kṛṣṇa form. The universal form,
with its thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just to draw
the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God’s original form.

The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in love with the
Lord in different transcendental relationships. The Supreme Godhead exchanges
transcendental love in His original form of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore to Arjuna, who was
so intimately related with Kṛṣṇa in friendship, this form of the universal
manifestation was not pleasing; rather, it was fearful. Arjuna, who is a
constant companion of Kṛṣṇa’s, must have had transcendental eyes; he was not an
ordinary man. Therefore he was not captivated by the universal form. This form
may seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating themselves by
fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional service, the
two-handed form of Kṛṣṇa is the most dear.

### 11.55


mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo

mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥ

nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava

mat-karma-kṛt—engaged in doing My work; mat-paramaḥ—concerning Me, the Supreme;
mat-bhaktaḥ—engaged in My devotional service; saṅga-varjitaḥ—freed from the
contamination of previous activities and mental speculation; nirvairaḥ—without
an enemy; sarva-bhūteṣu—to every living entity; yaḥ—one who; saḥ—he; mām—unto
Me; eti—comes; pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu.

**TRANSLATION**

My dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service, free from the
contaminations of previous activities and from mental speculation, who is
friendly to every living entity, certainly comes to Me.

**PURPORT**

Anyone who wants to approach the Supreme of all the Personalities of Godhead, on
the Kṛṣṇaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and be intimately connected with the
Supreme Personality, Kṛṣṇa, must take this formula, as is stated by the Supreme
Himself. Therefore, this verse is considered to be the essence of Bhagavad-gītā.
The Bhagavad-gītā is a book directed to the conditioned souls, who are engaged
in the material world with the purpose of lording it over nature and who do not
know of the real, spiritual life. The Bhagavad-gītā is meant to show how one can
understand his spiritual existence and his eternal relationship with the Supreme
Spiritual Personality and to teach one how to go back home, back to Godhead. Now
here is the verse which clearly explains the process by which one can attain
success in his spiritual activity: devotional service. As far as work is
concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely to Kṛṣṇa conscious
activities. No work should be done by any man except in relationship to Kṛṣṇa.
This called Kṛṣṇa-karma. One may be engaged in various activities, but one
should not be attached to the result of his work, but the result should be done
for Him. For example, one may be engaged in business, but to transform that
activity into Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one has to do business for Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa is
the proprietor of the business, then Kṛṣṇa should enjoy the profit of the
business. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousands of
dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Kṛṣṇa, he can do it. This is work
for Kṛṣṇa. Instead of constructing a big building for his sense gratification,
he can construct a nice temple for Kṛṣṇa, and he can install the Deity of Kṛṣṇa
and arrange for the Deity’s service, as is outlined in the authorized books of
devotional service. This is all Kṛṣṇa-karma. One should not be attached to the
result of his work, but the result should be offered to Kṛṣṇa. One should also
accept as prasādam, food, the remnants of offerings to Kṛṣṇa. If, however, one
is not able to construct a temple for Kṛṣṇa, one can engage himself in cleansing
the temple of Kṛṣṇa; that is also Kṛṣṇa-karma. One can cultivate a garden.
Anyone who has land—in India, at least, any poor man has a certain amount of
land—can utilize that for Kṛṣṇa by growing flowers to offer Him. He can sow
tulasī plants because tulasī leaves are very important, and Kṛṣṇa has
recommended this in Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa desires that one offer Him either a
leaf, or a flower, or a little water—and He is satisfied. This leaf especially
refers to the tulasī So one can sow tulasī leaves and pour water on the plant.
Thus, even the poorest man can engage in the service of Kṛṣṇa. These are some of
the examples of how one can engage in working for Kṛṣṇa.

The word mat-paramaḥ refers to one who considers the association of Kṛṣṇa in His
supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such a person does not wish
to be elevated to the higher planets such as the moon or sun or heavenly
planets, or even the highest planet of this universe, Brahmaloka. He has no
attraction for that. He is only attracted to being transferred to the spiritual
sky. And even in the spiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into the
glowing brahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter the highest spiritual
planet, namely Kṛṣṇaloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana. He has full knowledge of that
planet, and therefore he is not interested in any other. As indicated by the
word mad-bhaktaḥ, he fully engages in devotional service, specifically in the
nine processes of devotional engagement: hearing, chanting, remembering,
worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out
the orders of the Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything to
Him. One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, or at
least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.

The term saṅga-varjitaḥ is very significant. One should disassociate himself
from persons who are against Kṛṣṇa. Not only are the atheistic persons against
Kṛṣṇa, but also those who are attracted to fruitive activities and mental
speculation. Therefore the pure form of devotional service is described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu as follows: anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā. In this verse Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
clearly states that if anyone wants to execute unalloyed devotional service, he
must be freed from all kinds of material contamination. He must be freed from
the association of persons who are addicted to fruitive activities and mental
speculation. When, freed from such unwanted association and from the
contamination of material desires, one favorably cultivates knowledge of Kṛṣṇa,
that is called pure devotional service. Ānukūlyasya saṅkaplaḥ prātikūlyasya
varjanam. One should think of Kṛṣṇa and act for Kṛṣṇa favorably, not
unfavorably. Kaṁsa was an enemy of Kṛṣṇa’s. From the very beginning of Kṛṣṇa’s
birth, he planned in so many ways to kill Him, and because he was always
unsuccessful, he was always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Thus while working, while eating
and while sleeping, he was always Kṛṣṇa conscious in every respect, but that
Kṛṣṇa consciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite of his always
thinking of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a demon, and Kṛṣṇa
at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Kṛṣṇa attains salvation
immediately, but that is not the aim of the pure devotee. The pure devotee does
not even want salvation. He does not want to be transferred even to the highest
planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana. His only objective is to serve Kṛṣṇa wherever he may
be.

A devotee of Kṛṣṇa is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said here that he
has no enemy. How is this? A devotee situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness knows that
only devotional service to Kṛṣṇa can relieve a person from all the problems of
life. He has personal experience of this, and therefore he wants to introduce
this system, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, into human society. There are many examples in
history of devotees of the Lord risking their lives for the spreading of God
consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ. He was crucified by
the nondevotees, but He sacrificed His life for spreading God consciousness. Of
course, it would be superficial to understand that He was killed. Similarly, in
India also there are many examples, such as Ṭhākur Haridāsa. Why such risk?
Because they wanted to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and it is difficult. A Kṛṣṇa
conscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to his
forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the highest
benefit one can render to human society is relieving one’s neighbor from all
material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee is engaged in the service of
the Lord. Now, we can imagine how merciful Kṛṣṇa is to those engaged in His
service, risking everything for Him. Therefore it is certain that such persons
must reach the supreme planet after leaving the body.

In summary, the universal form of Kṛṣṇa, which is a temporary manifestation, and
the form of time which devours everything, and even the form of Viṣṇu,
four-handed, have all been exhibited by Kṛṣṇa. Thus Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all
these manifestations. It is not that Kṛṣṇa is a manifestation of the original
viśva-rūpa, or Viṣṇu. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all forms. There are hundreds and
thousands of Viṣṇus, but for a devotee, no form of Kṛṣṇa is important but the
original form, two-handed Śyāmasundara. In the Brahmā-saṁhitā it is stated that
those who are attached to the Śyāmasundara form of Kṛṣṇa in love and devotion
can see Him always within the heart and cannot see anything else. One should
understand, therefore, that the purport of this Eleventh Chapter is that the
form of Kṛṣṇa is essential and supreme.
