### 12.8


mayy eva mana ādhatsva

mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya

nivasiṣyasi mayy eva

ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ

mayi—unto Me; eva—certainly; manaḥ—mind; ādhatsva—fix; mayi—upon Me;
buddhim—intelligence; niveśaya—apply; nivasiṣyasi—you lead; mayi—unto Me;
eva—certainly; ataḥ—therefore; ūrdhvam—up; na—never; saṁśayaḥ—doubt.

**TRANSLATION**

Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and engage all
your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live in Me always, without a doubt.

**PURPORT**

One who is engaged in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s devotional service lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that his position is
transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does not live on the material
plane—he lives in Kṛṣṇa. The holy name of the Lord and the Lord are
nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa and His internal
potency are dancing on the tongue of the devotee. When he offers Kṛṣṇa food,
Kṛṣṇa directly accepts these eatables, and the devotee becomes Kṛṣṇa-ized by
eating the remnants. One who does not engage in such service cannot understand
how this is so, although this is a process recommended in the Gītā and in other
Vedic literatures.

### 12.9


atha cittaṁ samādhātuṁ

na śaknoṣi mayi sthiram

abhyāsa-yogena tato

mām icchāptuṁ dhanañjaya

atha—if, therefore; cittam—mind; samādhātam—fixing; na—not; śaknoṣi—able;
mayi—upon Me; sthiram—fixed; abhyāsa—practice; yogena—by devotional service;
tataḥ—therefore; mām—Me; icchā—desire; āptum—to get; dhanañjaya—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me without
deviation, then follow the regulated principles of bhakti-yoga In this way you
will develop a desire to attain to Me.

**PURPORT**

In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated. The first
applies to one who has actually developed an attachment for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. And the other is for one who has
not developed an attachment for the Supreme Person by transcendental love. For
this second class there are different prescribed rules and regulations, which
one can follow to be ultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to Kṛṣṇa.

Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment in material
existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sense gratification.
But, by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses can become purified, and in the
purified state they come directly in contact with the Supreme Lord. In this
material existence, I may be engaged in some service to some master, but I don’t
really lovingly serve my master. I simply serve to get some money. And the
master also is not in love; he takes service from me and pays me. So there is no
question of love. But for spiritual life, one must be elevated to the pure stage
of love. That stage of love can be achieved by practice of devotional service,
performed with the present senses.

This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone’s heart. And, there, love
of God is manifested in different ways, but it is contaminated by the material
association. Now the material association has to be purified, and that dormant,
natural love for Kṛṣṇa has to be revived. That is the whole process.

To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, under the
guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles: one should
rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple and offer prayers and
chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, then collect flowers to offer to the Deity, cook foodstuffs to
offer to the Deity, take prasādam, and so on. There are various rules and
regulations which one should follow. And one should constantly hear
Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from pure devotees. This practice can help
anyone to rise to the level of love of God, and then he is sure of his progress
into the spiritual kingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules
and regulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surely bring one
to the stage of love of God.

### 12.10


abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si

mat-karma-paramo bhava

mad-artham api karmāṇi

kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi

abhyāse—in the practice of; api—even; asamarthaḥ—unable; asi—you are;
mat-karma—My work; paramaḥ—supreme; bhava—you become; mat-artham—for My sake;
api—even though; karmāṇi—what; kurvan—performing; siddhim—perfection;
avāpsyasi—achieve.

**TRANSLATION**

If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to work for
Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect stage.

**PURPORT**

One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga,
under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still be drawn to this
perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. How to do this work has
already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse of the Eleventh Chapter. One
should be sympathetic to the propagation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There are many
devotees who are engaged in the propagation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and they
require help. So, even if one cannot directly practice the regulated principles
of bhakti-yoga, he can try to help such work. Every endeavor requires land,
capital, organization, and labor. Just as, in business, one requires a place to
stay, some capital to use, some labor, and some organization to expand, so the
same is required in the service of Kṛṣṇa. The only difference is that in
materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work, however, can be
performed for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, and that is spiritual activity. If one
has sufficient money, he can help in building an office or temple for
propagating Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Or he can help with publications. There are
various fields of activity, and one should be interested in such activities. If
one cannot sacrifice the result of such activities, the same person can still
sacrifice some percentage to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This voluntary
service to the cause of Kṛṣṇa consciousness will help one to rise to a higher
state of love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect.

### 12.11


athaitad apy aśakto ’si

kartuṁ mad-yogam āśritaḥ

sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ

tataḥ kuru yatātmavān

atha—even though; etat—this; api—also; aśaktaḥ—unable; asi—you are; kartum—to
perform; mat—unto Me; yogam—devotional service; āśritaḥ—refuge; sarva-karma—all
activities; phala—result; tyāgam—for renunciation; tataḥ—therefore; kuru—do;
yata-ātmavan—self-situated.

**TRANSLATION**

If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness, then try to act
giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

**PURPORT**

It may be that one is unable to even sympathize with the activities of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness because of social, familial or religious considerations or because
of some other impediments. If one attaches himself directly to the activities of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there may be objection from family members, or so many
other difficulties. For one who has such a problem, it is advised that he
sacrifice the accumulated result of his activities to some good cause. Such
procedures are described in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of
sacrifices and special functions of the pumundi or special work in which the
result of one’s previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become
elevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one who is not
even interested in the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness gives charity to some
hospital or some other social institution, he gives up the hard-earned results
of his activities. That is also recommended here because by the practice of
giving up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind
gradually, and in that purified stage of mind one becomes able to understand
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of course Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not dependant on any other
experience because Kṛṣṇa consciousness itself can purify one’s mind, but if
there are impediments to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one may try to give up the result
of his action. In that respect, social service, community service, national
service, sacrifice for one’s country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one
may come to the stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In
Bhagavad-gītā we find it is stated: yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānām: If one decides to
sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know that the supreme cause
is Kṛṣṇa, he will come gradually to understand that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme cause
by the sacrificial method.


### 12.12


śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj

jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate

dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas

tyāgāc chāntir anantaram

śreyaḥ—better; hi—certainly; jñānam—knowledge; abhyāsāt—by practice;
jnānāt—better than knowledge; dhyānam—meditation; viśiṣyate—especially
considered; dhyānāt—from meditation; karma-phala-tyāgaḥ—renunciation of the
results of fruitive action; tyāgāt—by such renunciation; śāntiḥ—peace;
anantaram—thereafter.

**TRANSLATION**

If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of
knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than
meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for by such renunciation one
can attain peace of mind.

**PURPORT**

As mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional service:
the way of regulated principles, and the way of full attachment in love to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who are actually not able to follow
the principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is better to cultivate knowledge
because by knowledge one can be able to understand his real position. Gradually
knowledge will develop to the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able
to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. There are
processes which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme, and that
sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage in devotional
service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, then there are prescribed
duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, for the brāhmaṇas, vaiśyas, and
śūdras, which we shall find in a later chapter of Bhagavad-gītā. But in all
cases, one should give up the result or fruits of labor; this means to employ
the result of karma for some good cause. In summary, to reach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the highest goal, there are two processes: one process
is by gradual development, and the other process is direct. Devotional service
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the direct method, and the other method involves
renouncing the fruits of one’s activities. Then one can come to the stage of
knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stage of understanding
the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One
may either take the step by step process or the direct path. The direct process
is not possible for everyone; therefore the indirect process is also good. It
is, however, to be understood that the indirect process is not recommended for
Arjuna because he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. It is for others who are not at this state; for them the gradual
process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realization of the Supersoul
and Brahman should be followed. But as far as Bhagavad-gītā is concerned, it is
the direct method that is stressed. Everyone is advised to take to the direct
method and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.

### 12.13-14


adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca

nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ

sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī

santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī

yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

mayy arpita-mano-buddhir

yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ

adveṣṭā—not envious; sarva-bhūtānām—for all living entities; maitraḥ—friendly;
karuṇaḥ—kindly; eva—certainly; ca—also; nirmamaḥ—with no sense of
proprietorship; nirahaṅkāraḥ—without false ego; sama—equally; duḥkhaḥ—distress;
sukhaḥ—happiness; kṣamī—forgiving; santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied; satatam—satisfied;
yogī—engaged in devotion; yatā-atmā—endeavoring; dṛdḥaniścayaḥ—with
determination; mayi—upon Me; arpita—engaged; manaḥ—mind; buddhiḥ—intelligent;
yaḥ—one who; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; saḥ me priyaḥ—he is dear to Me.

**TRANSLATION**

One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities, who does
not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and equal both in
happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and engaged in devotional
service with determination and whose mind and intelligence are in agreement with
Me—he is very dear to Me.

**PURPORT**

Coming again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is describing the
transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these two verses. A pure
devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor is he envious of anyone.
Nor does a devotee become his enemy’s enemy; he thinks that one is acting as his
enemy due to his own past misdeeds. Thus it is better to suffer than to protest.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated: tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣyamaṇo.
Whenever a devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that
it is the Lord’s mercy upon him. He thinks: “Thanks to my past misdeeds I should
suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I am due. I am just
getting a little, by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Therefore
he is always calm, quiet and patient, despite many distressful conditions. A
devotee is also always kind to everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a
devotee does not attach much importance to the peace and trouble pertaining to
the body because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. He
does not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the conception of
false ego and is equiposed both in happiness and distress. He is tolerant, and
he is satisfied with whatever comes by the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does
not endeavor much to achieve something with great difficulty; therefore he is
always joyful. He is a completely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the
instructions received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are
controlled, he is determined. He is not swayed by false argument because no one
can lead him from the fixed determination of devotional service. He is fully
conscious that Kṛṣṇa is the eternal Lord, so no one can disturb him. All his
qualifications enable him to depend entirely on the Supreme Lord. Such a
standard of devotional service is undoubtably very rare, but a devotee becomes
situated in that stage by following the regulative principles of devotional
service. Furthermore, the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for
the Lord is always pleased with all his activities in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
