### 1.37-38


yady apy ete na paśyanti

lobhopahata-cetasaḥ

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

mitra-drohe ca pātakam

kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ

pāpād asmān nivartitum

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

prapaśyadbhir janārdana

yadi—if; api—certainly; ete—they; na—do not; paśyanti—see; lobha—greed;
upahata—overpowered; cetasaḥ—the hearts; kula-kṣaya—in killing the family;
kṛtam—done; doṣam—fault; mitra-drohe—quarreling with friends; ca—also;
pātakam—sinful reactions; katham—why; na—shall not; jñeyam—know this;
asmābhiḥ—by us; pāpāt—from sins; asmāt—ourselves; nivartitum—to cease;
kula-kṣaya—the destruction of a dynasty; kṛtam—by so doing; doṣam—crime;
prapaśyadbhiḥ—by those who can see; janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa.

**TRANSLATION**

O Janārdana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing
one’s family or quarreling with friends, why should we, with knowledge of the
sin, engage in these acts?

**PURPORT**

A kṣatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so invited
by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could not refuse to fight
because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana. In this connection, Arjuna
considered that the other party might be blind to the effects of such a
challenge. Arjuna, however, could see the evil consequences and could not accept
the challenge. Obligation is actually binding when the effect is good, but when
the effect is otherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all these pros
and cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.

### 1.39


kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti

kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ

dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam

adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

kula-kṣaye—in destroying the family; praṇaśyanti—becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmāḥ—the family traditions; sanātanāḥ—eternal; dharme—in religion;
naṣṭe—being destroyed; kulam—family; kṛtsnam—wholesale; adharmaḥ—irreligious;
abhibhavati—transforms; uta—it is said.

**TRANSLATION**

With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished, and
thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligious practice.

**PURPORT**

In the system of the varṇāśrama institution there are many principles of
religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly and attain
spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such purifying processes
in the family, beginning from birth to death. But on the death of the elder
members, such family traditions of purification may stop, and the remaining
younger family members may develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their
chance for spiritual salvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder
members of the family be slain.

### 1.40


adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa

praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ

strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

adharma—irreligion; abhibhavāt—having been predominant; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa;
praduṣyanti—become polluted; kula-striyaḥ—family ladies; strīṣu —of the
womanhood; duṣṭāsu—being so polluted; vārṣṇeya—O descendant of Vṛṣṇi; jāyate—it
so becomes; varṇa-saṅkaraḥ—unwanted progeny.

**TRANSLATION**

When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Kṛṣṇa, the women of the family
become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant of Vṛṣṇi,
comes unwanted progeny.

**PURPORT**

Good population in human society is the basic principle for peace, prosperity
and spiritual progress in life. The varṇāśrama religion’s principles were so
designed that the good population would prevail in society for the general
spiritual progress of state and community. Such population depends on the
chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood. As children are very prone to be
misled, women are similarly very prone to degradation. Therefore, both children
and women require protection by the elder members of the family. By being
engaged in various religious practices, women will not be misled into adultery.
According to Cāṇakya Paṇḍit, women are generally not very intelligent and
therefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions of religious
activities should always engage them, and thus their chastity and devotion will
give birth to a good population eligible for participating in the varṇāśrama
system. On the failure of such varṇāśrama-dharma, naturally the women become
free to act and mix with men, and thus adultery is indulged in at the risk of
unwanted population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in society, and
thus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war and pestilence.

### 1.41


saṅkaro narakāyaiva

kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca

patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ

lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ

saṅkaraḥ—such unwanted children; narakāya—for hellish life; eva—certainly;
kula-ghnānām—of those who are killers of the family; kulasya—of the family;
ca—also; patanti—fall down; pitaraḥ—forefathers; hi—certainly; eṣām—of them;
lupta—stopped; piṇḍa—offerings; udaka—water; kriyāḥ—performance.

**TRANSLATION**

When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is created
both for the family and for those who destroy the family tradition. In such
corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations of food and water to the
ancestors.

**PURPORT**

According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is a need
to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of the family. This
offering is performed by worship of Viṣṇu, because eating the remnants of food
offered to Viṣṇu can deliver one from all kinds of sinful actions. Sometimes the
forefathers may be suffering from various types of sinful reactions, and
sometimes some of them cannot even acquire a gross material body and are forced
to remain in subtle bodies as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasādam food are
offered to forefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released from ghostly
or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers is a family
tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are required to perform such
rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional life is not required to perform
such actions. Simply by performing devotional service, one can deliver hundreds
and thousands of forefathers from all kinds of misery. It is stated in the
Bhāgavatam:

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛnāṁ pitṝṇāṁ na kiṅkaro nāyamṛṇī ca rājan sarvātmanā yaḥ
śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

“Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers.” (Bhāg. 11.5.41) Such
obligations are automatically fulfilled by performance of devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 1.42


doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ

varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ

utsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ

kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ

doṣaiḥ—by such faults; etaiḥ—all these; kula-ghnānām—of the destroyer of a
family; varṇa-saṅkara—unwanted children; kārakaiḥ—by the doers;
utsādyante—causes devastation; jāti-dharmāḥ—community project;
kula-dharmāḥ—family tradition; ca—also; śāśvatāḥ—eternal.

**TRANSLATION**

Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds of
community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.

**PURPORT**

The four orders of human society, combined with family welfare activities as
they are set forth by the institution of the sanātana-dharma or
varṇāśrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to attain his ultimate
salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanātana-dharma tradition by
irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaos in that society, and
consequently people forget the aim of life—Viṣṇu. Such leaders are called blind,
and persons who follow such leaders are sure to be led into chaos.

### 1.43


utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ

manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana

narake niyataṁ vāso

bhavatīty anuśuśruma

utsanna—spoiled; kula-dharmāṇām—of those who have the family traditions;
manuṣyāṇām—of such men; janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa; narake—in hell; niyatam—always;
vāsaḥ—residence; bhavati—it so becomes; iti—thus; anuśuśruma—I have heard by
disciplic succession.

**TRANSLATION**

O Kṛṣṇa, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that
those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on what he has
heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving real knowledge. One
cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge without being helped by the
right person who is already established in that knowledge. There is a system in
the varṇāśrama institution by which one has to undergo the process of ablution
before death for his sinful activities. One who is always engaged in sinful
activities must utilize the process of ablution called the prāyaścitta. Without
doing so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo miserable
lives as the result of sinful activities.

### 1.44


aho bata mahat pāpaṁ

kartuṁ vyavasitā vayam

yad rājya-sukha-lobhena

hantuṁ sva-janam udyatāḥ

ahaḥ—alas; bata—how strange it is; mahat—great; pāpam—sins; kartum—to perform;
vyavasitāḥ—decided; vayam—we; yat—so that; rājya—kingdom; sukha-lobhena—driven
by greed for royal happiness; hantum—to kill; svajanam—kinsmen; udyatāḥ—trying
for.

**TRANSLATION**

Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts,
driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.

**PURPORT**

Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as the
killing of one’s own brother, father, or mother. There are many such instances
in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly devotee of the Lord, is
always conscious of moral principles and therefore takes care to avoid such
activities.

### 1.45


yadi mām apratīkāram

aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus

tan me kṣemataraṁ bhavet

yadi—even if; mām—unto me; apratīkāram—without being resistant; aśastram—without
being fully equipped; śastra-pāṇayaḥ—those with weapons in hand;
dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; raṇe—in the battlefield; hanyuḥ—may kill;
tat—that; me—mine; kṣemataram—better; bhavet—become.

**TRANSLATION**

I would consider it better for the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra to kill me unarmed and
unresisting, rather than fight with them.

**PURPORT**

It is the custom—according to kṣatriya fighting principles—that an unarmed and
unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, in such an enigmatic
position, decided he would not fight if he were attacked by the enemy. He did
not consider how much the other party was bent upon fighting. All these symptoms
are due to softheartedness resulting from his being a great devotee of the Lord.