### 4.16


kiṁ karma kim akarmeti

kavayo ’py atra mohitāḥ

tat te karma pravakṣyāmi

yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt

kim—what is; karma—action; kim—what is; akarma—inaction; iti—thus; kavayaḥ—the
intelligent; api—also; atra—in this matter; mohitāḥ—bewildered; tat—that;
te—unto you; karma—work; pravakṣyāmi—I shall explain; yat—which; jñātvā—knowing;
mokṣyase—be liberated; aśubhāt—from ill fortune.

TRANSLATION

Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and what is
inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is, knowing which you shall be
liberated from all sins.

PURPORT

Action in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has to be executed in accord with the examples of
previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the 15th verse. Why such
action should not be independant will be explained in the text to follow.

To act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one has to follow the leadership of authorized
persons who are in a line of disciplic succession as explained in the beginning
of this chapter. The system of Kṛṣṇa consciousness was first narrated to the
sun-god, the sun-god explained it to his son Manu, Manu explained it to his son
Ikṣvāku, and the system is current on this earth from that very remote time.
Therefore, one has to follow in the footsteps of previous authorities in the
line of disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most intelligent men will be
bewildered regarding the standard actions of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For this
reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Kṛṣṇa consciousness directly.
Because of the direct instruction of the Lord to Arjuna, anyone who follows in
the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly not bewildered.

It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply by imperfect
experimental knowledge. Actually, the principles of religion can only be laid
down by the Lord Himself. Dharmaṁ hi sākṣāt-bhagavat-praṇītam. No one can
manufacture a religious principle by imperfect speculation. One must follow in
the footsteps of great authorities like Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, Manu, Kumāra,
Kapila, Prahlāda, Bhīṣma, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Yamarāja, Janaka, etc. By mental
speculation one cannot ascertain what is religion or self-realization.
Therefore, out of causeless mercy to His devotees, the Lord explains directly to
Arjuna what action is and what inaction is. Only action performed in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness can deliver a person from the entanglement of material existence.

### 4.17


karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ

boddhavyaṁ ca vikarmaṇaḥ

akarmaṇaś ca boddhavyaṁ

gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ

karmaṇaḥ—working order ; hi—certainly; api—also; boddhavyam—should be
understood; boddhavyam—to be understood; ca—also; vikarmaṇaḥ—forbidden work;
akarmaṇaḥ—inaction; ca—also; boddhavyam—should be understood; gahanā—very
difficult; karmaṇaḥ—working order; gatiḥ—to enter into.

TRANSLATION

The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should know
properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is.

If one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to understand
the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorized actions. One has to
apply oneself to such an analysis of action, reaction and perverted actions
because it is a very difficult subject matter. To understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness
and action according to the modes, one has to learn one’s relationship with the
Supreme; i.e., one who has learned perfectly knows that every living entity is
the eternal servitor of the Lord and that consequently one has to act in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gītā is directed toward this conclusion. Any
other conclusions, against this consciousness and its attendant reactions, are
vikarmas, or prohibitive actions. To understand all this one has to associate
with authorities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and learn the secret from them; this is
as good as learning from the Lord directly. Otherwise, even the most intelligent
person will be bewildered.

### 4.18


karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed

akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ

sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu

sa yuktaḥ kṛtsna-karma-kṛt

karmaṇi—in action; akarma—inaction; yaḥ—one who; paśyet—observes; akarmaṇi—in
inaction; ca—also; karma—fruitive action; yaḥ—one who; saḥ—he; buddhimān—is
intelligent; manuṣyeṣu—in human society; saḥ—he; yuktaḥ—is in the transcendental
position; kṛtsna-karma-kṛt—although engaged in all activities.

TRANSLATION

One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among
men, and he is in the tranecendental position, although engaged in all sorts of
activities.

PURPORT

A person acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is naturally free from the bonds of
karma. His activities are all performed for Kṛṣṇa; therefore he does not enjoy
or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he is intelligent in human
society, even though he is engaged in all sorts of activities for Kṛṣṇa. Akarma
means without reaction to work. The impersonalist ceases fruitive activities out
of fear, so that the resultant action may not be a stumbling block on the path
of self-realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he engages
himself in the activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because everything is done for
Kṛṣṇa, he enjoys only transcendental happiness in the discharge of this service.
Those who are engaged in this process are known to be without desire for
personal sense gratification. The sense of eternal servitorship to Kṛṣṇa makes
one immune to all sorts of reactionary elements of work.

### 4.19


yasya sarve samārambhāḥ

kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ

jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ

tam āhuḥ paṇḍitaṁ budhāḥ

yasya—one whose; sarve—all sorts of; samārambhāḥ—in all attempts; kāma—desire
for sense gratification; saṅkalpa—determination; varjitāḥ—are devoid of;
jñāna—of perfect knowledge; āgni—fire; dagdha—being burnt by; karmāṇam—the
performer; tam—him; āhuḥ—declare; paṇḍitam—learned; budhāḥ—those who know.

TRANSLATION

One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is devoid of desire
for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker whose fruitive
action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.

PURPORT

Only a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because the person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is devoid of all
kinds of sense-gratificatory propensities, it is to be understood that he has
burned up the reactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
actually learned who has attained to such perfection of knowledge. Development
of this knowledge of the eternal servitorship of the Lord is compared to fire.
Such a fire, once kindled, can burn up all kinds of reactions to work.

### 4.20


tyaktvā karma-phalāsaṅgaṁ

nitya-tṛpto nirāśrayaḥ

karmaṇy abhipravṛtto ’pi

naiva kiñcit karoti saḥ

tyaktvā—having given up; karma-phala-āsaṅgam—attachment for fruitive results;
nitya—always; tṛptaḥ—being satisfied; nirāśrayaḥ—without any center; karmaṇi—in
activity; abhipravṛttaḥ—being fully engaged; api—in spite of; na—does not;
eva—certainly; kiñcit—anything; karoti—do; saḥ—he.

TRANSLATION

Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever satisfied and
independant, he performs no fruitive action, although engaged in all kinds of
undertakings.

PURPORT

This freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
when one is doing everything for Kṛṣṇa. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person acts out of
pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore he has no
attraction for the results of the action. He is not even attached to his
personal maintenance, for everything is left to Kṛṣṇa. Nor is he anxious to
secure things, nor to protect things already in his possession. He does his duty
to his best ability and leaves everything to Kṛṣṇa. Such an unattached person is
always free from the resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he
were not doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions without fruitive
reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is
binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspect of vikarma, as explained
hereinbefore.

### 4.21


nirāśīr yata-cittātmā

tyakta-sarva-parigrahaḥ

śārīraṁ kevalaṁ karma

kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam

nirāśīḥ—without desire for the results; yata—controlled; citta-ātmā—mind and
intelligence; tyakta—giving up; sarva—all; parigrahaḥ—sense of proprietorship
over all possessions; śārīram—in keeping body and soul together; kevalam—only;
karma—work; kurvan—doing so; na—never; āpnoti—does not acquire; kilbiṣam—sinful
reactions.

TRANSLATION

Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions and acts
only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not affected by
sinful reactions.

PURPORT

A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his activities.
His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knows that he is part and
parcel of the Supreme, and therefore the part played by him, as a part and
parcel of the whole, is not his by choice but is chosen for him by the Supreme
and is done only through His agency. When the hand moves, it does not move out
of its own accord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Kṛṣṇa conscious
person is always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire for
personal sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of a machine. As a
machine part requires oiling and cleaning for maintenance, similarly, a Kṛṣṇa
conscious man maintains himself by his work just to remain fit for action in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the
reactions of his endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over
his own body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in his
possession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any real
independence. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person, fully engaged in self-realization, has
very little time to falsely possess any material object. For maintaining body
and soul, he does not require unfair means of accumulating money. He does not,
therefore, become contaminated by such material sins. He is free from all
reactions to his actions.

### 4.22


yadṛcchā-lābha-santuṣṭo

dvandvātīto vimatsaraḥ

samaḥ siddhāv asiddhau ca

kṛtvāpi na nibadhyate

yadṛcchā—out of its own accord; lābha—gain; santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied;
dvandva—duality; atītaḥ—surpassed; vimatsaraḥ—free from envy; samaḥ—steady;
siddhau—in success; asiddhau—failure; ca—also; kṛtvā—doing; api—although;
na—never; nibadhyate—is affected.

TRANSLATION

He who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is free from
duality and does not envy, who is steady both in success and failure, is never
entangled, although performing actions.

PURPORT

A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain his body.
He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their own accord. He neither
begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as is in his power, and is
satisfied with whatever is obtained by his own honest labor. He is therefore
independant in his livelihood. He does not allow anyone’s service to hamper his
own service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. However, for the service of the Lord he can
participate in any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality of the
material world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms of heat and
cold, or misery and happiness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person is above duality because
he does not hesitate to act in any way for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore
he is steady both in success and in failure. These signs are visible when one is
fully in transcendental knowledge.


### 4.23


gata-saṅgasya muktasya

jñānāvasthita-cetasaḥ

yajñāyācarataḥ karma

samagraṁ pravilīyate

gata-saṅgasya—unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya—of the
liberated; jñāna-avasthita—situated in transcendence; cetasaḥ—of such wisdom;
yajñāya—for the sake of Yajña (Kṛṣṇa); ācarataḥ—so acting; karma—work;
samagram—in total; pravilīyate—merges entirely.

TRANSLATION

The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and who is
fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into transcendence.

PURPORT

Becoming fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, one is freed from all dualities and thus is free
from the contaminations of the material modes. He can become liberated because
he knows his constitutional position in relationship with Kṛṣṇa; and thus his
mind cannot be drawn from Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Consequently, whatever he does,
he does for Kṛṣṇa, who is the primeval Viṣṇu. Therefore, all his works are
technically sacrifices because sacrifice involves satisfying the Supreme Person,
Kṛṣṇa. The resultant reactions to all such work certainly merge into
transcendence, and one does not suffer material effects.
