### 4.24


brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir

brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam

brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ

brahma-karma-samādhinā

brahma—spiritual nature; arpaṇam—contribution; brahma—the Supreme; haviḥ—butter;
brahma—spiritual; agnau—in the fire of consummation; brāhmaṇā—by the spirit
soul; hutam—offered; brahma—spiritual kingdom; eva—certainly; tena—by him;
gantavyam—to be reached; brahma—spiritual; karma—activities; samādhinā—by
complete absorption.

TRANSLATION

A person who is fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is sure to attain the
spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual activities, in
which the consummation is absolute and that which is offered is of the same
spiritual nature.

PURPORT

How activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness can lead one ultimately to the spiritual
goal is described here. There are various activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and
all of them will be described in the following verses. But, for the present,
just the principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is described. A conditioned soul,
entangled in material contamination, is sure to act in the material atmosphere,
and yet he has to get out of such an environment. The process by which the
conditioned soul can get out of the material atmosphere is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
For example, a patient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due to
overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product, namely curds.
The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured by Kṛṣṇa consciousness as
set forth here in the Gītā. This process is generally known as yajña, or
activities (sacrifices) simply meant for the satisfaction of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. The
more the activities of the material world are performed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
or for Viṣṇu only, the more the atmosphere becomes spiritualized by complete
absorption. Brahman means spiritual. The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His
transcendental body are called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence. Everything
that exists is situated in that brahmajyoti, but when the jyoti is covered by
illusion (māyā) or sense gratification, it is called material. This material
veil can be removed at once by Kṛṣṇa consciousness; thus the offering for the
sake of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the consuming agent of such an offering or
contribution; the process of consumption, the contributor, and the result
are—all combined together—Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth
covered by māyā is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the
Absolute Truth regains its spiritual quality. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the process
of converting the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme. When the
mind is fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is said to be in samādhi, or
trance. Anything done in such transcendental consciousness is called yajña, or
sacrifice for the Absolute. In that condition of spiritual consciousness, the
contributor, the contribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of the
performance, and the result or ultimate gain—everything—becomes one in the
Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 4.25


daivam evāpare yajñaṁ

yoginaḥ paryupāsate

brahmāgnāv apare yajñaṁ

yajñenaivopajuhvati

daivam—in worshiping the demigods; eva—like this; apare—some; yajñam—sacrifices;
yoginaḥ—the mystics; paryupāsate—worship perfectly; brahma—the Absolute Truth;
agnau—in the fire of; apare—others; yajñam—sacrifice; yajñena—by sacrifice;
eva—thus; upajuhvati—worship.

TRANSLATION

Some yogīs perfectly worship the demigods by offering different sacrifices to
them, and some of them offer sacrffices in the fire of the Supreme Brahman.

PURPORT

As described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is also called a perfect yogī or a first-class mystic. But there
are others also, who perform similar sacrifices in the worship of demigods, and
still others who sacrifice to the Supreme Brahman, or the impersonal feature of
the Supreme Lord. So there are different kinds of sacrifices in terms of
different categories. Such different categories of sacrifice by different types
of performers only superficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factual
sacrifice means to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, who is also known as Yajña.
All the different varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary
divisions: namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in pursuit of
transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness sacrifice all
material possessions for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, while others, who
want some temporary material happiness, sacrifice their material possessions to
satisfy demigods such as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who are
impersonalists, sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of
impersonal Brahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by the
Supreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all material functions like
the heating, watering and lighting of the universe. Those who are interested in
material benefits worship the demigods by various sacrifices according to the
Vedic rituals. They are called bahv-īśvara-vādī, or believers in many gods. But
others, who worship the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth and regard the
forms of the demigods as temporary, sacrifice their individual selves in the
supreme fire and thus end their individual existences by merging into the
existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists spend their time in philosophical
speculation to understand the transcendental nature of the Supreme. In other
words, the fruitive workers sacrifice their material possessions for material
enjoyment, whereas the impersonalist sacrifices his material designations with a
view to merging into the existence of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the
fire altar of sacrifice is the Supreme Brahman, and the offering is the self
being consumed by the fire of Brahman. The Kṛṣṇa conscious person, like Arjuna,
however, sacrifices everything for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, and thus all his
material possessions as well as his own self—everything—is sacrificed for Kṛṣṇa.
Thus, he is the first-class yogī; but he does not lose his individual existence.

### 4.26


śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy anye

saṁyamāgniṣu juhvati

śabdādīn viṣayān anya

indriyāgniṣu juhvati

śrotra ādīni—hearing process; indriyāṇi—senses; anye—others; saṁyama—of
restraint; agniṣu—in the fire; juhvati—offers; śabda-ādīn—sound vibration, etc.;
viṣayān—objects of sense gratification; anye—others: indriya—of sense organs;
agniṣu—in the fire; juhvati—sacrifice.

TRANSLATION

Some of them sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of the
controlled mind, and others sacrifice the objects of the senses, such as sound,
in the fire of sacrifice.

PURPORT

The four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacārī, the gṛhastha, the
vānaprastha, and the sannyāsī, are all meant to help men become perfect yogīs or
transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for our enjoying sense
gratification like the animals, the four orders of human life are so arranged
that one may become perfect in spiritual life. The brahmacārīs, or students
under the care of a bona fide spiritual master, control the mind by abstaining
from sense gratification. They are referred to in this verse as sacrificing the
hearing process and the senses in the fire of the controlled mind. A brahmacārī
hears only words concerning Kṛṣṇa consciousness; hearing is the basic principle
for understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacārī engages fully in harer
nāmānukīrtanam—chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He restrains
himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and his hearing is engaged in
the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, the
householders, who have some license for sense gratification, perform such acts
with great restraint. Sex life, intoxication and meat eating are general
tendencies of human society, but a regulated householder does not indulge in
unrestricted sex life and other sense gratifications. Marriage on principles of
religious life is therefore current in all civilized human society because that
is the way for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life is also
a kind of yajña because the restricted householder sacrifices his general
tendency toward sense gratification for higher transcendental life.

### 4.27


sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi

prāṇa-karmāṇi cāpare

ātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau

juhvati jñāna-dīpite

sarvāṇi—all; indriya—senses; karmāṇi—functions; prāṇa-karmāṇi—functions of the
life breath; ca—also; apare—others; ātma-saṁyama—controlling the mind;
yoga—linking process; agnau—in the fire of; juhvati—offers; jñāna-dīpite—because
of the urge for self-realization.

TRANSLATION

Those who are interested in self-realization, in terms of mind and sense
control, offer the functions of all the senses, as well as the vital force
[breath], as oblations into the fire of the controlled mind.

PURPORT

The yoga system conceived by Patañjali is referred to herein. In the Yoga-sūtra
of Patañjali, the soul is called pratyag-ātmā and parag-ātmā. As long as the
soul is attached to sense enjoyment, it is called parag-ātmā. The soul is
subjected to the functions of ten kinds of air at work within the body, and this
is perceived through the breathing system. The Pātañjala system of yoga
instructs one on how to control the functions of the body’s air in a technical
manner so that ultimately all the functions of the air within become favorable
for purifying the soul of material attachment. According to this yoga system,
pratyag ātmā is the ultimate goal. This pratyag ātmā is a withdrawal from
activities in matter. The senses interact with the sense objects, like the ear
for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose for smelling, tongue for tasting, hand for
touching, and all of them are thus engaged in activities outside the self. They
are called the functions of the prāṇa-vāyu. The apāna-vāyu goes downwards,
vyāna-vāyu acts to shrink and expand, samāna-vāyu adjusts equilibrium,
udāna-vāyu goes upwards—and when one is enlightened, one engages all these in
searching for self-realization.

### 4.28


dravya-yajñās tapo-yajñā

yoga-yajñās tathāpare

svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś ca

yatayaḥ saṁśita-vratāḥ

dravya-yajñāḥ—sacrificing one’s possessions; tapo-yajñāḥ—sacrifice in
austerities; yoga-yajñāḥ—sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tathā—thus;
apare—others; svādhyāya—sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;
jñāna-yajñāḥ—sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca—also;
yatayaḥ—enlightened; saṁśita—taken to strict; vratāḥ—vows.

TRANSLATION

There are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material possessions in
severe austerities, take strict vows and practice the yoga of eightfold
mysticism, and others study the Vedas for the advancement of transcendental
knowledge.

PURPORT

These sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are persons who are
sacrificing their possessions in the form of various kinds of charities. In
India, the rich mercantile community or princely orders open various kinds of
charitable institutions like dharmaśālā, anna-kṣetra, atithi-śālā, anathalaya,
vidyāpīṭha, etc. In other countries, too, there are many hospitals, old age
homes and similar charitable foundations meant for distributing food, education
and medical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities are
called dravyamaya-yajña. There are others who, for higher elevation in life or
for promotion to higher planets within the universe, voluntarily accept many
kinds of austerities such as candrāyana and cāturmāsya. These processes entail
severe vows for conducting life under certain rigid rules. For example, under
the cāturmāsya vow the candidate does not shave for four months during the year
(July to October), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a day
and does not leave home. Such sacrifice of the comforts of life is called
tapomaya-yajña. There are still others who engage themselves in different kinds
of mystic yogas like the Patañjali system (for merging into the existence of the
Absolute), or haṭha-yoga or aṣṭāṅga-yoga (for particular perfections). And some
travel to all the sanctified places of pilgrimage. All these practices are
called yoga-yajña, sacrifice for a certain type of perfection in the material
world. There are others who engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic
literatures, specifically the Upaniṣads and Vedānta-sūtras, or the sāṅkhya
philosophy. All of these are called svādhyāya-yajña, or engagement in the
sacrifice of studies. All these yogīs are faithfully engaged in different types
of sacrifice and are seeking a higher status of life. Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is,
however, different from these because it is the direct service of the Supreme
Lord. Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be attained by any one of the above-mentioned
types of sacrifices but can be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His
bona fide devotee. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is transcendental.

### 4.29


apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ

prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare

prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā

prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ

apare niyatāhārāḥ

prāṇān prāṇeṣu juhvati

apāne—air which acts downward; juhvati—offers; prāṇam—air which acts outward;
prāṇe—in the air going outward; apānam—air going downward; tathā—as also;
apare—others; prāṇa—air going outward; apāna—air going downward; gatī—movement;
ruddhvā—checking; prāṇāyāma—trance induced by stopping all breathing;
parāyaṇāḥ—so inclined; apare—others; niyata—controlled; āhārāḥ—eating;
prāṇān—outgoing air; prāṇeṣu—in the outgoing air; juhvati—sacrifices.

TRANSLATION

And there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath restraint to
remain in trance, and they practice stopping the movement of the outgoing breath
into the incoming, and incoming breath into the outgoing, and thus at last
remain in trance, stopping all breathing. Some of them, curtailing the eating
process, offer the outgoing breath into itself, as a sacrifice.

PURPORT

This system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called prāṇāyāma,
and in the beginning it is practiced in the haṭha-yoga system through different
sitting postures. All of these processes are recommended for controlling the
senses and for advancement in spiritual realization. This practice involves
controlling the air within the body to enable simultaneous passage in opposite
directions. The apāna air goes downward, and the prāṇa air goes up. The
prāṇāyāma yogī practices breathing the opposite way until the currents are
neutralized into pūraka, equilibrium. Similarly, when the exhaled breathing is
offered to inhaled breathing, it is called recaka. When both air currents are
completely stopped, it is called kumbhaka-yoga. By practice of kumbhaka-yoga,
the yogīs increase the duration of life by many, many years. A Kṛṣṇa conscious
person, however, being always situated in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, automatically becomes the controller of the senses. His senses, being
always engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, have no chance of becoming otherwise
engaged. So at the end of life, he is naturally transferred to the
transcendental plane of Lord Kṛṣṇa; consequently he makes no attempt to increase
his longevity. He is at once raised to the platform of liberation. A Kṛṣṇa
conscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and he is constantly in
that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down, and ultimately he
enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. The practice of reduced eating
is automatically done when one eats only Kṛṣṇa prasādam, or food which is
offered first to the Lord. Reducing the eating process is very helpful in the
matter of sense control. And without sense control there is no possibility of
getting out of the material entanglement.
