### 4.36


api ced asi pāpebhyaḥ

sarvebhyaḥ pāpa-kṛt-tamaḥ

sarvaṁ jñāna-plavenaiva

vṛjinaṁ santariṣyasi

api—even; cet—if; asi—you are; pāpebhyaḥ—of sinners; sarvebhyaḥ—of all;
pāpa-kṛttamaḥ—the greatest sinner; sarvam—all such sinful actions;
jñāna-plavena—by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva—certainly;
vṛjinam—the ocean of miseries; santariṣyasi—you will cross completely.

TRANSLATION

Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when you are
situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will be able to cross over
the ocean of miseries.

PURPORT

Proper understanding of one’s constitutional position in relationship to Kṛṣṇa
is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle for existence which
goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material world is sometimes regarded as
an ocean of nescience and sometimes as a blazing forest. In the ocean, however
expert a swimmer one may be, the struggle for existence is very severe. If
someone comes forward and lifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the
greatest savior. Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the path of liberation. The boat of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very
simple, but at the same time the most sublime.

### 4.37


yathaidhāṁsi samiddho ’gnir

bhasma-sāt kurute ’rjuna

jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi

bhasma-sāt kurute tathā

yathā—just as; edhāṁsi—firewood; samiddhaḥ—blazing; agniḥ—fire; bhasmasāt—turns
into ashes; kurute—so does; arjuna—O Arjuna; jñāna-agniḥ—the fire of knowledge;
sarva-karmāṇi—all reactions to material activities; bhasmasāt—to ashes;
kurute—it so does; tathā—similarly.

TRANSLATION

As the blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.

PURPORT

Perfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is compared
herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions to impious activities,
but also all reactions to pious activities, turning them to ashes. There are
many stages of reaction: reaction in the making, reaction fructifying, reaction
already achieved, and reaction a priori. But knowledge of the constitutional
position of the living entity burns everything to ashes. When one is in complete
knowledge, all reactious, both a priori and a posteriori, are consumed. In the
Vedas it is stated: ubhe uhaivaiṣa ete taraty amṛtaḥ sādhv-asādhūnī: “One
overcomes both the pious and impious interactions of work.”

### 4.38


na hi jñānena sadṛśaṁ

pavitram iha vidyate

tat svayaṁ yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ

kālenātmani vindati

na—never; hi—certainly; jñānena—with knowledge; sadṛśam—in comparison;
pavitram—sanctified; iha—in this world; vidyate—exists; tat—that; svayam—itself;
yoga—devotion; saṁsiddhaḥ—matured; kālena—in course of time; ātmani—in himself;
vindati—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental knowledge.
Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one who has achieved
this enjoys the self within himself in due course of time.

PURPORT

When we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of spiritual
understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, and knowledge is the cause of
our liberation. This knowledge is the mature fruit of devotional service, and
when one is situated in transcendental knowledge, he need not search for peace
elsewhere, for he enjoys peace within himself. In other words, this knowledge
and peace are culminated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the last word in the
Bhagavad-gītā.

### 4.39


śraddhāvāl labhate jñānaṁ

tat-paraḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ

jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntim

acireṇādhigacchati

śraddhāvān—a faithful man; labhate—achieves; jñānam—knowledge; tat-paraḥ—very
much attached to it; saṁyata—controlled; indriyaḥ—senses; jñanam—knowledge;
labdhvā—having achieved; parām—transcendental; śāntim—peace; acireṇa—very soon;
adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who subdues his
senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.

PURPORT

Such knowledge in Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be achieved by a faithful person who
believes firmly in Kṛṣṇa. One is called a faithful man who thinks that, simply
by acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can attain the highest perfection. This
faith is attained by the discharge of devotional service, and by chanting “Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare
Hare,” which cleanses one’s heart of all material dirt. Over and above this, one
should control the senses. A person who is faithful to Kṛṣṇa and who controls
the senses can easily attain perfection in the knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness
without delay.

### 4.40


ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

saṁśayātmā vinaśyati

nāyaṁ loko ’sti na paro

na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

ajñaḥ—fools who have no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca—and;
aśraddadhānaḥ—without faith in revealed scriptures; ca—also; saṁśaya—doubts;
ātmā—person; vinaśyati—falls back; na—never; ayam—this; lokaḥ—world; asti—there
is; na—neither; paraḥ—next life; na—not; sukham—happiness; saṁśaya—doubtful;
ātmanaḥ—of the person.

TRANSLATION

But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do not
attain God consciousness. For the doubting soul there is happiness neither in
this world nor in the next.

PURPORT

Out of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the Bhagavad-gītā is
the best. Persons who are almost like animals have no faith in, or knowledge of,
the standard revealed scriptures; and some, even though they have knowledge of,
or can cite passages from, the revealed scriptures, have actually no faith in
these words. And even though others may have faith in scriptures like
Bhagavad-gītā, they do not believe in or worship the Personality of Godhead, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Such persons cannot have any standing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They fall
down. Out of all the abovementioned persons, those who have no faith and are
always doubtful make no progress at all. Men without faith in God and His
revealed word find no good in this world, nor in the next. For them there is no
happiness whatsoever. One should therefore follow the principles of revealed
scriptures with faith and thereby be raised to the platform of knowledge. Only
this knowledge will help one become promoted to the transcendental platform of
spiritual understanding. In other words, doubtful persons have no status
whatsoever in spiritual emancipation. One should therefore follow in the
footsteps of great ācāryas who are in the disciplic succession and thereby
attain success.

### 4.41


yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ

jñāna-sañchinna-saṁśayam

ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi

nibadhnanti dhanañjaya

yoga—devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta—renounced; karmāṇam—of the
performers; jñāna—knowledge; sañchinna—cut by the advancement of knowledge;
saṁśayam—doubts; ātma-vantam—situated in the self; na—never; karmāṇi—work;
nibadhnanti—do bind up; dhanañjaya—O conquerer of riches.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose doubts are
destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is situated firmly in the self,
is not bound by works, O conqueror of riches.

PURPORT

One who follows the instruction of the Gītā, as it is imparted by the Lord, the
Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubts by the grace of
transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel of the Lord, in full Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, is already established in self-knowledge. As such, he is
undoubtedly above bondage to action.

### 4.42


tasmād ajñāna-sambhūtaṁ

hṛt-sthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥ

chittvainaṁ saṁśayaṁ yogam

ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhārata

tasmāt—therefore; ajñāna-sambhūtam—outcome of ignorance; hṛt-stham—situated in
the heart; jñāna—knowledge; asinā—by the weapon of; ātmanaḥ—of the self;
chittvā—cutting off; enam—this; saṁśayam—doubt; yogam—in yoga; ātiṣṭha—be
situated; uttiṣṭha—stand up to fight; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance should be
slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, O Bhārata, stand and fight.

PURPORT

The yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sanātana-yoga, or eternal
activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has two divisions of
sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one’s material possessions, and
the other is called knowledge of self, which is pure spiritual activity. If
sacrifice of one’s material possessions is not dovetailed for spiritual
realization, then such sacrifice becomes material. But one who performs such
sacrifices with a spiritual objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect
sacrifice. When we come to spiritual activities, we find that these are also
divided into two: namely, understanding of one’s own self (or one’s
constitutional position), and the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One who follows the path of the Gītā as it is can very easily
understand these two important divisions of spiritual knowledge. For him there
is no difficulty in obtaining perfect knowledge of the self as part and parcel
of the Lord. And such understanding is beneficial for such a person who easily
understands the transcendental activities of the Lord. In the beginning of this
chapter, the transcendental activities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme
Lord Himself. One who does not understand the instructions of the Gītā is
faithless, and is to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence
awarded to him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does not
understand the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-knowing
Personality of Godhead, is certainly fool number one. Ignorance can be removed
by gradual acceptance of the principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is awakened by different types of sacrifices to the demigods,
sacrifice to Brahman, sacrifice in celibacy, in household life, in controlling
the senses, in practicing mystic yoga, in penance, in foregoing material
possessions, in studying the Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution
called varṇāśrama-dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of them
are based on regulated action. But within all these activities, the important
factor is self-realization. One who seeks that objective is the real student of
Bhagavad-gītā, but one who doubts the authority of Kṛṣṇa falls back. One is
therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gītā, or any other scripture, under a bona
fide spiritual master, with service and surrender. A bona fide spiritual master
is in the disciplic succession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all
from the instructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions of
years ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā have come
down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, follow the path of
Bhagavad-gītā as it is expressed in the Gītā itself and beware of
self-interested people after personal aggrandizement who deviate others from the
actual path. The Lord is definitely the supreme person, and His activities are
transcendental. One who understands this is a liberated person from the very
beginning of his study of the Gītā.


Karma-yoga—Action in Kṛṣṇa Consciousness

### 5.1


arjuna uvāca

sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa

punar yogaṁ ca śaṁsasi

yac chreya etayor ekaṁ

tan me brūhi su-niścitam

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; sannyāsam—renunciation; karmaṇām—of all activities;
kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; punaḥ—again; yogam—devotional service; ca—also; śaṁsasi—You are
praising; yat—which; śreyaḥ—is beneficial; etayoḥ—of these two; ekam—one;
tat—that; me—unto me; brūhi—please tell; suniścitam—definitely.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then again
You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell me definitely which
of the two is more beneficial?

