Karma-yoga—Action in Kṛṣṇa Consciousness

### 5.1


arjuna uvāca

sannyāsaṁ karmaṇāṁ kṛṣṇa

punar yogaṁ ca śaṁsasi

yac chreya etayor ekaṁ

tan me brūhi su-niścitam

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; sannyāsam—renunciation; karmaṇām—of all activities;
kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; punaḥ—again; yogam—devotional service; ca—also; śaṁsasi—You are
praising; yat—which; śreyaḥ—is beneficial; etayoḥ—of these two; ekam—one;
tat—that; me—unto me; brūhi—please tell; suniścitam—definitely.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then again
You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell me definitely which
of the two is more beneficial?

**PURPORT**

In this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotional service is
easier than the latter because, being transcendental in nature, it frees one
from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminary knowledge of the soul and its
entanglement in the material body were explained. How to get out of this
material encagement by buddhi-yoga, or devotional service, was also explained
therein. In the Third Chapter, it was explained that a person who is situated on
the platform of knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And, in the
Fourth Chapter, the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial work
culminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, the Lord
advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfect knowledge.
Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance of both work in devotion
and inaction in knowledge, Kṛṣṇa has perplexed Arjuna and confused his
determination. Arjuna understands that renunciation in knowledge involves
cessation of all kinds of work performed as sense activities. But if one
performs work in devotional service, then how is work stopped? In other words,
he thinks that sannyāsam, or renunciation in knowledge, should be altogether
free from all kinds of activity because work and renunciation appear to him to
be incompatible. He appears not to have understood that work in full knowledge
is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction. He inquires, therefore,
whether he should cease work altogether, or work with full knowledge.

### 5.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaś ca

niḥśreyasa-karāv ubhau

tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt

karma-yogo viśiṣyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Personality of Godhead said; sannyāsaḥ—renunciation of
work; karma-yogaḥ—work in devotion; ca—also; niḥśreyasa-karau—all leading to the
path of liberation; ubhau—both; tayoḥ—of the two; tu—but; karma-sannyāsāt—in
comparison to the renunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogaḥ—work in devotion;
viśiṣyate—is better.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion are both
good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional service is better than
renunciation of works.

**PURPORT**

Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for material
bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed at improving the standard
of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrate to different types of bodies,
thereby continuing material bondage perpetually. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam confirms this
as follows:

nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti na sādhu manye yata
ātmano ’yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvanna jijñāsata ātma-tattvam yāvat kriyās tāvad
idaṁ mano vai karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ

evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne prītir na yāvan mayi
vāsudeve na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat

“People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that this
present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one’s fruitive
activities in the past. Although this body is temporary, it is always giving one
trouble in many ways. Therefore, to act for sense gratification is not good. One
is considered to be a failure in life as long as he makes no inquiry about the
nature of work for fruitive results, for as long as one is engrossed in the
consciousness of sense gratification, one has to transmigrate from one body to
another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitive activities and
influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love for devotional service to
Vāsudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity to get out of the bondage of
material existence.” (Bhāg. 5.5.4-6)

Therefore, jñāna (or knowledge that one is not this material body but spirit
soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in the status of spirit
soul, otherwise there is no escape from material bondage. Action in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is not, however, action on the fruitive platform. Activities
performed in full knowledge strengthen one’s advancement in real knowledge.
Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, mere renunciation of fruitive activities does not
actually purify the heart of a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not
purified, one has to work on the fruitive platform. But action in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness automatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so
that one need not descend to the material platform. Therefore, action in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which always entails a risk of
falling. Renunciation without Kṛṣṇa consciousness is incomplete, as is confirmed
by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo vairāgyaṁ
phalgu kathyate.

“Renunciation by persons eager to achieve liberation of things which are related
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they are material, is called
incomplete renunciation.” Renunciation is compete when it is in the knowledge
that everything in existence belongs to the Lord and that no one should claim
proprietorship over anything. One should understand that, factually, nothing
belongs to anyone. Then where is the question of renunciation? One who knows
that everything is Kṛṣṇa’s property is always situated in renunciation. Since
everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, everything should be employed in the service of
Kṛṣṇa. This perfect form of action in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is far better than any
amount of artificial renunciation by a sannyāsī of the Māyāvādī school.

### 5.3


jñeyaḥ sa nitya-sannyāsī

yo na dveṣṭi na kāṅkṣati

nirdvandvo hi mahā-bāho

sukhaṁ bandhāt pramucyate

jñeyaḥ—should be known; saḥ—he; nitya—always; sannyāsī—renouncer; yaḥ—who;
na—never; dveṣṭi—abhors; na—nor; kāṅkṣati—desires; nirdvandvaḥ—free from all
dualities; hi—certainly; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; sukham—happily;
bandhāt—from bondage; pramucyate—completely liberated.

**TRANSLATION**

One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be
always renounced. Such a person, liberated from all dualities, easily overcomes
material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armed Arjuna.

**PURPORT**

One who is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is always a renouncer because he feels
neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Such a renouncer,
dedicated to the transcendental loving service of the Lord, is fully qualified
in knowledge because he knows his constitutional position in his relationship
with Kṛṣṇa. He knows fully well that Kṛṣṇa is the whole and that he is part and
parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively and
quantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Kṛṣṇa is incorrect because
the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one is one in quality yet
different in quantity is correct transcendental knowledge leading one to become
full in himself, having nothing to aspire to nor lament over. There is no
duality in his mind because whatever he does, he does for Kṛṣṇa. Being thus
freed from the platform of dualities, he is liberated—even in this material
world.

### 5.4


sāṅkhya-yogau pṛthag bālāḥ

pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ

ekam apy āsthitaḥ samyag

ubhayor vindate phalam

sāṅkhya—analytical study of the material world; yogau—work in devotional
service; pṛthak—different; bālāḥ—less intelligent; pravadanti—do talk; na—never;
paṇḍitāḥ—the learned; ekam—in one; api—even though; āsthitaḥ—being situated;
samyak—complete; ubhayoḥ—of both; vindate—enjoys; phalam—result.

**TRANSLATION**

Only the ignorant speak of karma-yoga and devotional service as being different
from the analytical study of the material world [sāṅkhya]. Those who are
actually learned say that he who applies himself well to one of these paths
achieves the results of both.

**PURPORT**

The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the soul of
existence. The soul of the material world is Viṣṇu, or the Supersoul. Devotional
service to the Lord entails service to the Supersoul. One process is to find the
root of the tree, and next to water the root. The real student of sāṅkhya
philosophy finds the root of the material world, Viṣṇu, and then, in perfect
knowledge, engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in essence,
there is no difference between the two because the aim of both is Viṣṇu. Those
who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes of sāṅkhya and karma-yoga
are not the same, but one who is learned knows the unifying aim in these
different processes.

### 5.5


yat sāṅkhyaiḥ prāpyate sthānaṁ

tad yogair api gamyate

ekaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ ca yogaṁ ca

yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

yat—what; sāṅkhyaiḥ—by means of sāṅkhya philosophy; prāpyate—is achieved;
sthānam—place; tat—that; yogaiḥ—by devotional service; api—also; gamyate—one can
attain; ekam—one; sāṅkhyam—analytical study; ca—and; yogam—action in devotion;
ca—and; yaḥ—one who; paśyati—sees; saḥ—he; paśyati—actually sees.

**TRANSLATION**

One who knows that the position reached by means of renunciation can also be
attained by works in devotional service and who therefore sees that the path of
works and the path of renunciation are one, sees things as they are.

**PURPORT**

The real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal of life.
Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there is no difference
between the conclusions reached by the two processes. By sāṅkhya philosophical
research one comes to the conclusion that a living entity is not a part and
parcel of the material world, but of the supreme spirit whole. Consequently, the
spirit soul has nothing to do with the material world; his actions must be in
some relation with the Supreme. When he acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is
actually in his constitutional position. In the first process of sāṅkhya, one
has to become detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga process one has
to attach himself to the work of Kṛṣṇa. Factually, both processes are the same,
although superficially one process appears to involve detachment and the other
process appears to involve attachment. However, detachment from matter and
attachment to Kṛṣṇa are one and the same. One who can see this sees things as
they are.

### 5.6


sannyāsas tu mahā-bāho

duḥkham āptum ayogataḥ

yoga-yukto munir brahma

na cireṇādhigacchati

sannyāsaḥ—the renounced order of life; tu—but; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one;
duḥkham—distress; āptum—to be afflicted with; ayogataḥ—without devotional
service; yoga-yuktaḥ—one engaged in devotional service; muniḥ—thinker;
brahma—Supreme; na—without; cireṇa—delay; adhigacchati—attains.

**TRANSLATION**

Unless one is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, mere renunciation
of activities cannot make one happy. The sages, purified by works of devotion,
achieve the Supreme without delay.

**PURPORT**

There are two classes of sannyāsīs, or persons in the renounced order of life.
The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs are engaged in the study of sāṅkhya philosophy, whereas
the Vaisnava sannyāsīs are engaged in the study of Bhāgavatam philosophy, which
affords the proper commentary on the Vedānta-sūtras. The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs also
study the Vedānta-sūtras, but use their own commentary, called Śārīraka-bhāṣya,
written by Śaṅkarācārya. The students of the Bhāgavata school are engaged in
devotional service of the Lord, according to pāñcarātrikī regulations, and
therefore the Vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs have multiple engagements in the transcendental
service of the Lord. The Vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs have nothing to do with material
activities, and yet they perform various activities in their devotional service
to the Lord. But the Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, engaged in the studies of sāṅkhya and
Vedānta and speculation, cannot relish transcendental service of the Lord.
Because their studies become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of
Brahman speculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhāgavatam without proper
understanding. Consequently their study of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam becomes
troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations by artificial means
are all useless for the Māyāvādī sannyāsīs. The Vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs, who are
engaged in devotional service, are happy in the discharge of their
transcendental duties, and they have the guarantee of ultimate entrance into the
kingdom of God. The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs sometimes fall down from the path of
self-realization and again enter into material activities of a philanthropic and
altruistic nature, which are nothing but material engagements. Therefore, the
conclusion is that those who are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are better
situated than the sannyāsīs engaged in simple Brahman speculation, although they
too come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, after many births.

### 5.7


yoga-yukto viśuddhātmā

vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ

sarva-bhūtātma-bhūtātmā

kurvann api na lipyate

yoga-yuktaḥ—engaged in devotional service; viśuddha-ātmā—a purified soul;
vijita-ātmā—self-controlled; jita-indriyaḥ—having conquered the senses;
sarvabhuta-ātmabhūta-ātmā—compassionate to all living entities; kurvan
api—although engaged in work; na—never; lipyate—is entangled.

**TRANSLATION**

One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his mind and
senses, is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him. Though always working,
such a man is never entangled.

**PURPORT**

One who is on the path of liberation by Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very dear to
every living being, and every living being is dear to him. This is due to his
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Such a person cannot think of any living being as separate
from Kṛṣṇa, just as the leaves and branches of a tree are not separate from the
tree. He knows very well that by pouring water on the root of the tree, the
water will be distributed to all the leaves and branches, or by supplying food
to the stomach, the energy is automatically distributed throughout the body.
Because one who works in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear
to everyone. And, because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure in
consciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind is completely
controlled. And, because his mind is controlled, his senses are also controlled.
Because his mind is always fixed on Kṛṣṇa, there is no chance of his being
deviated from Kṛṣṇa. Nor is there a chance that he will engage his senses in
matters other than the service of the Lord. He does not like to hear anything
except topics relating to Kṛṣṇa; he does not like to eat anything which is not
offered to Kṛṣṇa; and he does not wish to go anywhere if Kṛṣṇa is not involved.
Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannot be
offensive to anyone. One may ask, “Why then was Arjuna offensive (in battle) to
others? Wasn’t he in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?” Arjuna was only superficially
offensive because (as has already been explained in the Second Chapter) all the
assembled persons on the battlefield would continue to live individually, as the
soul cannot be slain. So, spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra. Only their dresses were changed by the order of Kṛṣṇa, who was
personally present. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying out the
orders of Kṛṣṇa in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Such a person is never entangled in
the reactions of work.
