tree. He knows very well that by pouring water on the root of the tree, the
water will be distributed to all the leaves and branches, or by supplying food
to the stomach, the energy is automatically distributed throughout the body.
Because one who works in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear
to everyone. And, because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure in
consciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind is completely
controlled. And, because his mind is controlled, his senses are also controlled.
Because his mind is always fixed on Kṛṣṇa, there is no chance of his being
deviated from Kṛṣṇa. Nor is there a chance that he will engage his senses in
matters other than the service of the Lord. He does not like to hear anything
except topics relating to Kṛṣṇa; he does not like to eat anything which is not
offered to Kṛṣṇa; and he does not wish to go anywhere if Kṛṣṇa is not involved.
Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannot be
offensive to anyone. One may ask, “Why then was Arjuna offensive (in battle) to
others? Wasn’t he in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?” Arjuna was only superficially
offensive because (as has already been explained in the Second Chapter) all the
assembled persons on the battlefield would continue to live individually, as the
soul cannot be slain. So, spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra. Only their dresses were changed by the order of Kṛṣṇa, who was
personally present. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying out the
orders of Kṛṣṇa in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Such a person is never entangled in
the reactions of work.

### 5.8-9


naiva kiñcit karomīti

yukto manyeta tattva-vit

paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighrann

aśnan gacchan svapan śvasan

pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇann

unmiṣan nimiṣann api

indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu

vartanta iti dhārayan

na—never; eva—certainly; kiñcit—anything; karomi—do I do; iti—thus;
yuktaḥ—engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta—thinks; tattvavit—one who
knows the truth; paśyan—by seeing; śṛṇvan—by hearing; spṛśan—by touching;
jighran—by smelling; aśnan—by eating; gacchan—by going; svapan—by dreaming;
śvasan—by breathing; pralapan—by talking; visṛjan—by giving up; gṛhṇan—by
accepting; unmiṣan—opening; nimiṣan—closing; api—in spite of; indriyāṇi—the
senses; indriya-artheṣu—in sense gratification; vartante—let them be so engaged;
iti—thus; dhārayan—considering.

TRANSLATION

A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping, and breathing, always knows
within himself that he actually does nothing at all. Because while speaking,
evacuating, receiving, opening or closing his eyes, he always knows that only
the material senses are engaged with their objects and that he is aloof from
them.

PURPORT

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is pure in his existence, and consequently he
has nothing to do with any work which depends upon five immediate and remote
causes: the doer, the work, the situation, the endeavor and fortune. This is
because he is engaged in the loving transcendental service of Kṛṣṇa. Although he
appears to be acting with his body and senses, he is always conscious of his
actual position, which is spiritual engagement. In material consciousness, the
senses are engaged in sense gratification, but in Kṛṣṇa consciousness the senses
are engaged in the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa’s senses. Therefore, the Kṛṣṇa
conscious person is always free, even though he appears to be engaged in things
of the senses. Activities such as seeing, hearing, speaking, evacuating, etc.,
are actions of the senses meant for work. A Kṛṣṇa consciousness person is never
affected by the actions of the senses. He cannot perform any act except in the
service of the Lord because he knows that he is the eternal servitor of the
Lord.

### 5.10


brahmaṇy ādhāya karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥ

lipyate na sa pāpena

padma-patram ivāmbhasā

brahmaṇi—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādhāya—resigning unto; karmāṇi—all
works; saṅgam—attachment; tyaktvā—giving up; karoti—performs; yaḥ—who;
lipyate—is affected; na—never; saḥ—he; pāpena—by sin; padma-patram—lotus leaf;
iva—like; ambhasā—in the water.

TRANSLATION

One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results unto the
Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is untouched by
water.

PURPORT

Here brahmaṇi means in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The material world is a sum total
manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technically called the
pradhāna. The Vedic hymns, sarvam etad brahma, tasmād etad brahma nāma-rūpam
annaṁ ca jāyate, and, in the Bhagavad-gītā, mama yonir mahad brahma, indicate
that everything in the material world is the manifestation of Brahman; and,
although the effects are differently manifested, they are nondifferent from the
cause. In the Īśopaniṣad it is said that everything is related to the Supreme
Brahman or Kṛṣṇa, and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows
perfectly well that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, that He is the proprietor of
everything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service of the
Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of his activities, whether
virtuous or sinful. Even one’s material body, being a gift of the Lord for
carrying out a particular type of action, can be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
It is beyond contamination by sinful reactions, exactly as the lotus leaf,
though remaining in the water, is not wet. The Lord also says in the Gītā: mayi
sarvāṇi karmāṇi sannyasya: “Resign all works unto Me [Kṛṣṇa].” The conclusion is
that a person without Kṛṣṇa consciousness acts according to the concept of the
material body and senses, but a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness acts according to
the knowledge that the body is the property of Kṛṣṇa and should therefore be
engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa.

### 5.11


kāyena manasā buddhyā

kevalair indriyair api

yoginaḥ karma kurvanti

saṅgaṁ tyaktvātma-śuddhaye

kāyena—with the body; manasā—with the mind; buddhyā—with the intelligence;
kevalaiḥ—purified; indriyaiḥ—with the senses; api—even with; yoginaḥ—the Kṛṣṇa
conscious persons; karma—actions; kurvanti—they act; saṅgam—attachment;
tyaktvā—giving up; ātma—self; śuddhaye—for the purpose of purification.

TRANSLATION

The yogīs, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence, and even
with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.

PURPORT

By acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of Kṛṣṇa,
any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even of the senses, is
purified of material contamination. There are no material reactions resulting
from the activities of a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. Therefore, purified activities,
which are generally called sadācāra, can be easily performed by acting in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu describes this as
follows:

īhā yasya harer dāsye karmaṇā manasā girā nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu jīvanmuktaḥ sa
ucyate

A person acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness (or, in other words, in the service of
Kṛṣṇa) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person even
within the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called material
activities. He has no false ego, nor does he believe that he is this material
body, nor that he possesses the body. He knows that he is not this body and that
this body does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and the body too
belongs to Kṛṣṇa. When he applies everything produced of the body, mind,
intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.—whatever he may have within his
possession—to Kṛṣṇa’s service, he is at once dovetailed with Kṛṣṇa. He is one
with Kṛṣṇa and is devoid of the false ego that leads one to believe that he is
the body, etc. This is the perfect stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 5.12


yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā

śāntim āpnoti naiṣṭhikīm

ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa

phale sakto nibadhyate

yuktaḥ—one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam—the results of all
activities; tyaktvā—giving up; śāntim—perfect peace; āpnoti—achieves;
naiṣṭhikīm—unflinching; ayuktaḥ—one who is not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
kāma-kāreṇa—for enjoying the result of work; phale—in the result;
saktaḥ—attached; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers the
result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not in union with the
Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor, becomes entangled.

PURPORT

The difference between a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and a person in bodily
consciousness is that the former is attached to Kṛṣṇa, whereas the latter is
attached to the results of his activities. The person who is attached to Kṛṣṇa
and works for Him only is certainly a liberated person, and he is not anxious
for fruitive rewards. In the Bhāgavatam, the cause of anxiety over the result of
an activity is explained as being due to one’s functioning in the conception of
duality, that is, without knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no
duality. All that exists is a product of Kṛṣṇa’s energy, and Kṛṣṇa is all good.
Therefore, activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are on the absolute plane; they are
transcendental and have no material effect. One is, therefore, filled with peace
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One who is, however, entangled in profit calculation for
sense gratification cannot have that peace. This is the secret of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness—realization that there is no existence besides Kṛṣṇa is the
platform of peace and fearlessness.

### 5.13


sarva-karmāṇi manasā

sannyasyāste sukhaṁ vaśī

nava-dvāre pure dehī

naiva kurvan na kārayan

sarva—all; karmāṇi—activities; manasā—by the mind; sannyasya—giving up;
āste—remains; sukham—in happiness; vaśī—one who is controlled; nava-dvāre—in the
place where there are nine gates; pure—in the city; dehī—the embodied soul;
na—never; eva—certainly; kurvan—doing anything; na—not; kārayan—causing to be
done.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces all
actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates [the material body],
neither working nor causing work to be done.

PURPORT

The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of the body,
or the figurative city of body, are conducted automatically by the particular
modes of nature. The soul, although subjecting himself to the conditions of the
body, can be beyond those conditions, if he so desires. Owing only to
forgetfulness of his superior nature, he identifies with the material body, and
therefore suffers. By Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can revive his real position and
thus come out of his embodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, one at once becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In
such a controlled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he lives happily
within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are described as follows:

nava-dvāre pure dehī haṁso lelāyate bahiḥ vaśī sarvasya lokasya sthāvarasya
carasya ca.

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a living
entity, is the controller of all living entities all over the universe. The body
consists of nine gates: two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth, the anus
and the genital. The living entity in his conditioned stage identifies himself
with the body, but when he identifies himself with the Lord within himself, he
becomes just as free as the Lord, even while in the body.” (Śvet. 3.18)

Therefore, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person is free from both the outer and inner
activities of the material body.

### 5.14


na kartṛtvaṁ na karmāṇi

lokasya sṛjati prabhuḥ

na karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ

svabhāvas tu pravartate

na—never; kartṛtvam—proprietorship; na—nor; karmāṇi—activities; lokasya—of the
people; sṛjati—creates; prabhuḥ—the master of the city of the body; na—nor;
karma-phala—results of activities; saṁyogam—connection; svabhāvaḥ—modes of
material nature; tu—but; pravartate—acts.

TRANSLATION

The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create activities,
nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the fruits of action. All
this is enacted by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one in nature
with the Supreme Lord, distinguished from matter, which is another nature—called
inferior—of the Lord. Somehow, the superior nature, the living entity, has been
in contact with material nature since time immemorial. The temporary body or
material dwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activities
and their resultant reactions. Living in such a conditional atmosphere, one
suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifying himself (in
ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance acquired from time immemorial that is
the cause of bodily suffering and distress. As soon as the living entity becomes
aloof from the activities of the body, he becomes free from the reactions as
well. As long as he is in the city of body, he appears to be the master of it,
but actually he is neither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and
reactions. He is simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for
existence. The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control over
them. His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendental Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. That alone will save him from all turmoil.
