### 5.15


nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ

na caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ

ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ

tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

na—never; ādatte—accepts; kasyacit—anyone’s; pāpam—sin; na—nor; ca—also;
eva—certainly; sukṛtam—pious activities; vibhuḥ—the Supreme Lord; ajñānena—by
ignorance; āvṛtam—covered; jñānam—knowledge; tena—by that; muhyanti—bewildered;
jantavaḥ—the living entities.

TRANSLATION

Nor does the Supreme Spirit assume anyone’s sinful or pious activities. Embodied
beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance which covers their real
knowledge.

PURPORT

The Sanskrit word vibhuḥ means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He is always
satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities. He does not
create a particular situation for any living entity, but the living entity,
bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into certain conditions of life, and
thereby his chain of action and reaction begins. A living entity is, by superior
nature, full of knowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by
ignorance due to his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living
entity is not. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is aṇu,
or atomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire by his
free will. Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord. And so, when
the living entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lord allows him to fulfill
those desires, but the Lord is never responsible for the actions and reactions
of the particular situation which may be desired. Being in a bewildered
condition, therefore, the embodied soul identifies himself with the
circumstantial material body and becomes subjected to the temporary misery and
happiness of life. The Lord is the constant companion of the living entity as
Paramātmā, or the Supersoul, and therefore He can understand the desires of the
individual soul, as one can smell the flavor of a flower by being near it.
Desire is a subtle form of conditioning of the living entity. The Lord fulfills
his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes. The individual is not,
therefore, omnipotent in fulfilling his desires. The Lord, however, can fulfill
all desires, and the Lord, being neutral to everyone, does not interfere with
the desires of the minute independant living entities. However, when one desires
Kṛṣṇa, the Lord takes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way
that one can attain to Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymn therefore
declares:

eṣa u hy eva sādhu karma kārayati taṁ yamebhyo lokebhya unninīṣate eṣa u
evāsādhu karma kārayati yamadho ninīṣate.

ajño jantur anīso ’yam ātmanaḥ sukha-duḥkhayoḥ īśvara-prerito gacchet svargaṁ
vāśvabhram eva ca.

“The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so he may be elevated.
The Lord engages him in impious activities so he may go to hell. The living
entity is completely dependant in his distress and happiness. By the will of the
Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as a cloud is driven by the air.”

Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although he is
constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to the littleness of his
existence he forgets his constitutional position of service to the Lord and is
thus entrapped by nescience. And, under the spell of ignorance, the living
entity claims that the Lord is responsible for his conditional existence. The
Vedānta-sūtras also confirm this:

vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye na sāpekṣatvāt tathā hi darśayati.

“The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appears to.”

### 5.16


jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ

yeṣāṁ nāśitam ātmanaḥ

teṣām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ

prakāśayati tat param

jñānena—by knowledge; tu—but; tat—that; ajñānam—nescience; yeṣām—of those;
nāśitam—is destroyed; ātmanaḥ—of the living entity; teṣām—of their;
ādityavat—like the rising sun; jñānam—knowledge; prakāśayati—discloses; tat
param—in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

TRANSLATION

When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience is
destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights up
everything in the daytime.

PURPORT

Those who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa must certainly be bewildered, but those who are
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is stated in the
Bhagavad-gītā, “sarvaṁ jñāna-plavena,” “jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi” and “na hi
jñānena sadṛśam.” Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what is that
knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa, as is
said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ
prapadyate. After passing through many, many births, when one perfect in
knowledge surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa, or when one attains Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then
everything is revealed to him, as the sun reveals everything in the daytime. The
living entity is bewildered in so many ways. For instance, when he thinks
himself God, unceremoniously, he actually falls into the last snare of
nescience. If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered by
nescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, then nescience, or
Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can be obtained from a person who is
in perfect Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, one has to seek out such a bona fide
spiritual master and, under him, learn what Kṛṣṇa consciousness is. The
spiritual master can drive away all nescience, as the sun drives away darkness.
Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he is not this body but is
transcendental to the body, he still may not be able to discriminate between the
soul and the Supersoul. However, he can know everything well if he cares to take
shelter of the perfect, bona fide Kṛṣṇa conscious spiritual master. One can know
God and one’s relationship with God only when one actually meets a
representative of God. A representative of God never claims that he is God,
although he is paid all the respect ordinarily paid to God because he has
knowledge of God. One has to learn the distinction between God and the living
entity. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore stated in the Second Chapter (2.12) that every
living being is individual and that the Lord also is individual. They were all
individuals in the past, they are individuals at present, and they will continue
to be individuals in the future, even after liberation. At night we see
everything as one in the darkness, but in day when the sun is up, we see
everything in its real identity. Identity with individuality in spiritual life
is real knowledge.

### 5.17


tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas

tan-niṣṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ

gacchanty apunar-āvṛttiṁ

jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ

tad-buddhayaḥ—one whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tad-ātmānaḥ—one
whose mind is always in the Supreme; tat-niṣṭhāḥ—whose mind is only meant for
the Supreme; tat-parāyaṇāḥ—who has completely taken shelter of Him;
gacchanti—goes; apunaḥ-āvṛttim—liberation; jñāna—knowledge; nirdhūta—cleanses;
kalmaṣāḥ—misgivings.

TRANSLATION

When one’s intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the Supreme,
then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through complete knowledge and
thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.

PURPORT

The Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Kṛṣṇa. The whole Bhagavad-gītā centers
around the declaration of Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is
the version of all Vedic literature. Paratattva means the Supreme Reality, who
is understood by the knowers of the Supreme as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān.
Bhagavān, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the last word in the
Absolute. There is nothing more than that.TheLord says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat
kiñcit asti dhanañjaya. Impersonal Brahman is also supported by Kṛṣṇa: brahmaṇo
pratiṣṭhāham. Therefore in all ways Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Reality. One whose
mind, intelligence, faith and refuge are always in Kṛṣṇa, or, in other words,
one who is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is undoubtedly washed clean of all
misgivings and is in perfect knowledge in everything concerning transcendence. A
Kṛṣṇa conscious person can thoroughly understand that there is duality
(simultaneous identity and individuality) in Kṛṣṇa, and, equipped with such
transcendental knowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of
liberation.

### 5.18


vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

vidyā—education; vinaya—gentleness; sampanne—fully equipped; brāhmaṇe—in the
brāhmaṇa; gavi—in the cow; hastini—in the elephant; śuni—in the dog; ca—and;
eva—certainly; śvapāke—in the dog-eater (the outcaste); ca—respectively;
paṇḍitāḥ—those who are so wise; sama-darśinaḥ—do see with equal vision.

TRANSLATION

The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned
and gentle brāhmaṇa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste] .

PURPORT

A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not make any distinction between species or
castes. The brāhmaṇa and the outcaste may be different from the social point of
view, or a dog, a cow, or an elephant may be different from the point of view of
species, but these differences of body are meaningless from the viewpoint of a
learned transcendentalist. This is due to their relationship to the Supreme, for
the Supreme Lord, by His plenary portion as Paramātmā, is present in everyone’s
heart. Such an understanding of the Supreme is real knowledge. As far as the
bodies are concerned in different castes or different species of life, the Lord
is equally kind to everyone because He treats every living being as a friend yet
maintains Himself as Paramātmā regardless of the circumstances of the living
entities. The Lord as Paramātmā is present both in the outcaste and in the
brāhmaṇa, although the body of a brāhmaṇa and that of an outcaste are not the
same. The bodies are material productions of different modes of material nature,
but the soul and the Supersoul within the body are of the same spiritual
quality. The similarity in the quality of the soul and the Supersoul, however,
does not make them equal in quantity, for the individual soul is present only in
that particular body, whereas the Paramātmā is present in each and every body. A
Kṛṣṇa conscious person has full knowledge of this, and therefore he is truly
learned and has equal vision. The similar characteristics of the soul and
Supersoul are that they are both conscious, eternal and blissful. But the
difference is that the individual soul is conscious within the limited
jurisdiction of the body, whereas the Supersoul is conscious of all bodies. The
Supersoul is present in all bodies without distinction.

### 5.19


ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo

yeṣāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ

nirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma

tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ

iha—in this life; eva—certainly; taiḥ—by them; jitaḥ—conquered; sargaḥ—birth and
death; yeṣām—of those; sāmye—in equanimity; sthitam—so situated; manaḥ—mind;
nirdoṣam—flawless; hi—certainly; samam—in equanimity; brahma—the Supreme;
tasmāt—therefore; brahmaṇi—in the Supreme; te—they; sthitāḥ—are situated.

TRANSLATION

Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have already
conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless like Brahman, and
thus they are already situated in Brahman.

PURPORT

Equanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-realization. Those
who have actually attained to such a stage should be considered to have
conquered material conditions, specifically birth and death. As long as one
identifies with this body, he is considered a conditioned soul, but as soon as
he is elevated to the stage of equanimity through realization of self, he is
liberated from conditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take
birth in the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after his
death. The Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred.
Similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, he also becomes
flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky. Such persons are to be
considered already liberated, and their symptoms are described below.

### 5.20


na prahṛṣyet priyaṁ prāpya

nodvijet prāpya cāpriyam

sthira-buddhir asammūḍho

brahma-vid brahmaṇi sthitaḥ

na—never; prahṛṣyet—rejoice; priyam—pleasant; prāpya—achieving; na—does not;
udvijet—agitated; prāpya—obtaining; ca—also; apriyam—unpleasant;
sthira-buddhiḥ—self-intelligent; asammūḍhaḥ—unbewildered; brahmavit—one who
knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmaṇi—in the Transcendence; sthitaḥ—situated.

TRANSLATION

A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor laments upon
obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent, unbewildered, and who
knows the science of God, is to be understood as already situated in
Transcendence.

PURPORT

The symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first symptom is
that he is not illusioned by the false identification of the body with his true
self. He knows perfectly well that he is not this body, but is the fragmental
port~on of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is therefore not joyful in
achieving something, nor does he lament in losing anything which is related to
his body. This steadiness of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence.
He is therefore never bewildered by mistaking the gross body for the soul, nor
does he accept the body as permanent and disregard the existence of the soul.
This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing the complete science of
the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. He thus knows his
constitutional position perfectly well, without falsely trying to become one
with the Supreme in all respects. This is called Brahman realization, or
self-realization. Such steady consciousness is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
