### 5.29


bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

bhoktāram—beneficiary; yajña—sacrifices; tapasām—of penances and austerities;
sarva-loka—all planets and the demigods thereof; maheśvaram—the Supreme Lord;
suhṛdam—benefactor; sarva—all; bhūtānām—of the living entities; jñātvā—thus
knowing; mām—Me (Lord Kṛṣṇa); śāntim—relief from material pangs;
ṛcchati—achieves.

TRANSLATION

The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities,
the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and well-wisher
of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of material miseries.

PURPORT

The conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all anxious to
attain peace in the material world. But they do not know the formula for peace,
which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-gītā. The greatest peace formula
is simply this: Lord Kṛṣṇa is the beneficiary in all human activities. Men
should offer everything to the transcendental service of the Lord because He is
the proprietor of all planets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater than
He. He is greater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā.
In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is described as tam īśvarāṇāṁ paramaṁ maheśvaram.
Under the spell of illusion, living entities are trying to be lords of all they
survey, but actually they are dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The
Lord is the master of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under the
stringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these bare facts, it
is not possible to achieve peace in the world either individually or
collectively. This is the sense of Kssna consciousness: Lord Kṛṣṇa is the
supreme predominator, and all living entities, including the great demigods, are
His subordinates. One can attain perfect peace only in complete Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, generally
known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as to how karma-yoga can
give liberation is answered herewith. To work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to work
with the complete knowledge of the Lord as the predominator. Such work is not
different from transcendental knowledge. Direct Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
bhakti-yoga, and jñāna-yoga is a path leading to bhakti-yoga. Kṛṣṇa
consciousness means to work in full knowledge of one’s relationship with the
Supreme Absolute, and the perfection of this consciousness is full knowledge of
Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant
of God as His fragmental part and parcel. He comes into contact with māyā
(illusion) due to the desire to lord it over māyā, and that is the cause of his
many sufferings. As long as he is in contact with matter, he has to execute work
in terms of material necessities. Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, brings one into
spiritual life even while one is within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an
arousing of spiritual existence by practice in the material world. The more one
is advanced, the more he is freed from the clutches of matter. The Lord is not
partial toward anyone. Everything depends on one’s practical performance of
duties in an effort to control the senses and conquer the influence of desire
and anger. And, attaining Kṛṣṇa consciousness by controlling the above-mentioned
passions, one remains factually in the transcendental stage, or brahman-nirvāṇa.
The eightfold yoga mysticism is automatically practiced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
because the ultimate purpose is served. There is gradual process of elevation in
the practice of yama, niyama, āsana, pratyāhāra, dhyāna, dhāraṇā, prāṇāyāma, and
samādhi. But these only preface perfection by devotional service, which alone
can award peace to the human being. It is the highest perfection of life.


Sāṅkhya-yoga

### 6.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ

kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ

sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca

na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Lord said; anāśritaḥ—without shelter; karma-phalam—the
result of work; kāryam—obligatory; karma—work; karoti—performs; yaḥ—one who;
saḥ—he; sannyāsī—in the renounced order; ca—also; yogī—mystic; ca—also; na—not;
nir—without; agniḥ—fire; na—nor; ca—also; akriyaḥ—without duty.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who
works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true
mystic: not he who lights no fire and performs no work.

PURPORT

In this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold yoga system
is a means to control the mind and the senses. However, this is very difficult
for people in general to perform, especially in the age of Kali. Although the
eightfold yoga system is recommended in this chapter, the Lord emphasizes that
the process of karma-yoga, or acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is better. Everyone
acts in this world to maintain his family and their paraphernalia, but no one is
working without some self-interest, some personal gratification, be it
concentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to act in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of work. To act in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the duty of every living entity because all are
constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The parts of the body work
for the satisfaction of the whole body. The limbs of the body do not act for
self-satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the
living entity who acts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for
personal satisfaction is the perfect sannyāsī, the perfect yogī.

The sannyāsīs sometimes artificially think that they have become liberated from
all material duties, and therefore they cease to perform agnihotra yajñas (fire
sacrifices), but actually they are self-interested because their goal is
becoming one with the impersonal Brahman. Such a desire is greater than any
material desire, but it is not without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogī
who practices the yoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material
activities, desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, without
self-interest. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person has no desire for self-satisfaction. His
criterion of success is the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, and thus he is the perfect
sannyāsī, or perfect yogī. Lord Caitanya, the highest perfectional symbol of
renunciation, prays in this way:

na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye.  mama janmani
janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi.

“O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy beautiful
women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want only is the causeless
mercy of Your devotional service in my life, birth after birth.”

### 6.2


yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur

yogaṁ taṁ viddhi pāṇḍava

na hy asannyasta-saṅkalpo

yogī bhavati kaścana

yam—what; sannyāsam—renunciation; iti—thus; prāhuḥ—they say; yogam—linking with
the Supreme; tam—that; viddhi—you must know; pāṇḍava—O son of Pāṇḍu; na—never;
hi—certainly; asannyasta—without giving up; saṅkalpaḥ—self-satisfaction; yogī—a
mystic transcendentalist; bhavati—becomes; kaścana—anyone.

TRANSLATION

What is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking oneself with the
Supreme, for no one can become a yogī unless he renounces the desire for sense
gratification.

PURPORT

Real sannyāsa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his constitutional
position as the living entity, and act accordingly. The living entity has no
separate independant identity. He is the marginal energy of the Supreme. When he
is entrapped by material energy, he is conditioned, and when he is Kṛṣṇa
conscious, or aware of the spiritual energy, then he is in his real and natural
state of life. Therefore, when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases all
material sense gratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatory
activities. This is practiced by the yogīs who restrain the senses from material
attachment. But a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has no opportunity to engage his
senses in anything which is not for the purpose of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, a Kṛṣṇa
conscious person is simultaneously a sannyāsī and a yogī. The purpose of
knowledge and of restraining the senses, as prescribed in the jñāna and yoga
processes, is automatically served in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is unable to
give up the activities of his selfish nature, then jñāna and yoga are of no
avail. The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfaction
and to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person has no
desire for any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for the enjoyment of
the Supreme. One who has no information of the Supreme must therefore be engaged
in self-satisfaction because no one can stand on the platform of inactivity. All
these purposes are perfectly served by the practice of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 6.3


ārurukṣor muner yogaṁ

karma kāraṇam ucyate

yogārūḍhasya tasyaiva

śamaḥ kāraṇam ucyate

ārurukṣoḥ—of one who has just begun yoga; muneḥ—of the sage; yogam—the eightfold
yoga system; karma—work; kāraṇam—the cause; ucyate—is said to be; yoga—eightfold
yoga; ārūḍhasya—one who has attained; tasya—his; eva—certainly; śamaḥ—cessation
of all material activities; kāraṇam—the cause; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be the
means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation of all material
activities is said to be the means.

PURPORT

The process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga, which may be
compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritual realization. This
ladder begins from the lowest material condition of the living entity and rises
up to perfect self-realization in pure spiritual life. According to various
elevations, different parts of the ladder are known by different names. But all
in all, the complete ladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts,
namely jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder is
called the yogārurukṣa stage, and the highest rung is called yogārūḍha.

Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning to enter into
meditation through regulative principles of life and practice of different
sitting postures (which are more or less bodily exercises) are considered
fruitive material activities. All such activities lead to achieving perfect
mental equilibrium to control the senses. When one is accomplished in the
practice of meditation, he ceases all disturbing mental activities.

A Kṛṣṇa conscious person is, however, situated from the beginning on the
platform of meditation because he always thinks of Kṛṣṇa. And, being constantly
engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he is considered to have ceased all material
activities.

### 6.4


yadā hi nendriyārtheṣu

na karmasv anuṣajjate

sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī

yogārūḍhas tadocyate

yadā—when; hi—certainly; na—not; indriya-artheṣu—in sense gratification;
na—never; karmasu—in fruitive activities; anuṣajjate—does necessarily engage;
sarva-saṅkalpa—all material desires; sannyāsī—renouncer; yoga-ārūḍhaḥ—elevated
in yoga; tadā—at that time; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to have attained to yoga when, having renounced all material
desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive
activities.

PURPORT

When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged in sense
gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must be engaged in sense
gratification, since one cannot live without engagement. Without Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, one must be always seeking self-centered or extended selfish
activities. But a Kṛṣṇa conscious person can do everything for the satisfaction
of Kṛṣṇa and thereby be perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has
no such realization must mechanically try to escape material desires before
being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.
