### 6.5


uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ

nātmānam avasādayet

ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur

ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ

uddharet—one must deliver; ātmanā—by the mind; ātmānam—the conditioned soul;
na—never; ātmānam—the conditioned soul; avasādayet—put into degradation;
ātmā—mind; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; ātmanaḥ—of the conditioned soul;
bandhuḥ—friend; ātmā—mind; eva—certainly; ripuḥ—enemy; ātmanaḥ—of the
conditioned soul.

TRANSLATION

A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The mind is the
friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

PURPORT

The word ātmā denotes body, mind and soul—depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soul are
especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yoga practice, ātmā
refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga system is to control the mind
and to draw it away from attachment to sense objects. It is stressed herein that
the mind must be so trained that it can deliver the conditioned soul from the
mire of nescience. In material existence one is subjected to the influence of
the mind and the senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material
world because of the mind’s ego which desires to lord it over material nature.
Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not be attracted by the
glitter of material nature, and in this way the conditioned soul may be saved.
One should not degrade oneself by attraction to sense objects. The more one is
attracted by sense objects, the more one becomes entangled in material
existence. The best way to disentangle oneself is to always engage the mind in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The word hi is used for emphasizing this point, i.e., that
one must do this. It is also said:

mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ bandha-mokṣayoḥ bandhāya viṣayāsaṅgo muktyai
nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ.

“For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of liberation. Mind
absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, and mind detached from the
sense objects is the cause of liberation.” Therefore, the mind which is always
engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation.

### 6.6


bandhur ātmātmanas tasya

yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ

anātmanas tu śatrutve

vartetātmaiva śatru-vat

bandhuḥ—friend; ātmā—mind; ātmanaḥ—of the living entity; tasya—of him; yena—by
whom; ātmā—mind; eva—certainly; ātmanā—by the living entity; jitaḥ—conquered;
anātmanaḥ—of one who has failed to control the mind; tu—but; śatrutve—because of
enmity; varteta—remains; ātmā eva—the very mind; śatruvat—as an enemy.

TRANSLATION

For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one
who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the greatest enemy.

PURPORT

The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in order to make
it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless the mind is controlled, the
practice of yoga (for show) is simply a waste of time. One who cannot control
his mind lives always with the greatest enemy, and thus his life and its mission
are spoiled. The constitutional position of the living entity is to carry out
the order of the superior. As long as one’s mind remains an unconquered enemy,
one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc. But when
the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by the dictation of the
Personality of Godhead, who is situated within the heart of everyone as
Paramātmā. Real yoga practice entails meeting the Paramātmā within the heart and
then following His dictation. For one who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness directly,
perfect surrender to the dictation of the Lord follows automatically.

### 6.7


jitātmanaḥ praśāntasya

paramātmā samāhitaḥ

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu

tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

jita-ātmanaḥ—of one who has conquered his mind; praśāntasya—of one who has
attained tranquility by such control over the mind; paramātmā—the Supersoul;
samāhitaḥ—approached completely; śīta—cold; uṣṇa—heat; sukha—in happiness;
duḥkheṣu—in distress; tathā—also; māna—honor; apamānayoḥ—in dishonor.

TRANSLATION

For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached, for he has
attained tranquility. To such a man happiness and distress, heat and cold, honor
and dishonor are all the same.

PURPORT

Actually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone’s heart as Paramātmā.
When the mind is misled by the external illusory energy, one becomes entangled
in material activities. Therefore, as soon as one’s mind is controlled through
one of the yoga systems, one is to be considered as having already reached the
destination. One has to abide by superior dictation. When one’s mind is fixed on
the superior nature, he has no other alternative but to follow the dictation of
the Supreme. The mind must admit some superior dictation and follow it. The
effect of controlling the mind is that one automatically follows the dictation
of the Paramātmā or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position is at once
achieved by one who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the devotee of the Lord is
unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namely distress and
happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is practical samādhi, or absorption in
the Supreme.

### 6.8


jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā

kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ

yukta ity ucyate yogī

sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ

jñāna—acquired knowledge; vijñāna—realized knowledge; tṛpta—satisfied;
ātmā—living entity; kūṭasthaḥ—spiritually situated; vijita-indriyaḥ—sensually
controlled; yuktaḥ—competent for self-realization; iti—thus; ucyate—is said;
yogī—the mystic; sama—equiposed; loṣṭra—pebbles; aśma—stone; kāñcanaḥ—gold.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a yogī [or
mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired knowledge and
realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence and is self-controlled.
He sees everything—whether it be pebbles, stones or gold—as the same.

PURPORT

Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless. This is
stated as follows:

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam
eva sphuraty adaḥ.

“No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality and
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through his materially contaminated senses. Only when one
becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the
transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him.”
(Padma Purāṇa)

This Bhagavad-gītā is the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No one can become
Kṛṣṇa conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must be fortunate enough to
associate with a person who is in pure consciousness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person
has realized knowledge, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, because he is satisfied with pure
devotional service. By realized knowledge, one becomes perfect. By
transcendental knowledge one can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere
academic knowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparent
contradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually self-controlled because
he is surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. He is transcendental because he has nothing to do
with mundane scholarship. For him mundane scholarship and mental speculation,
which may be as good as gold to others, are of no greater value than pebbles or
stones.

### 6.9


suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna-

madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu

sādhuṣv api ca pāpeṣu

sama-buddhir viśiṣyate

suhṛt—by nature a well-wisher; mitra—benefactor with affection; ari—enemy;
udāsīna—neutral between the belligerents; madhyastha—mediator between the
belligerents; dveṣya—envious; bandhuṣu—among the relatives or well-wishers;
sādhuṣu—unto the pious; api—as well as; ca—and; pāpeṣu—unto the sinners;
sama-buddhiḥ—having equal intelligence; viśiṣyate—is far advanced.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all—the honest
well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious, the pious, the sinner and those
who are indifferent and impartial—with an equal mind.

### 6.10


yogī yuñjīta satatam

ātmānaṁ rahasi sthitaḥ

ekākī yata-cittātmā

nirāśīr aparigrahaḥ

yogī—a transcendentalist; yuñjīta—must concentrate in Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
satatam—constantly; ātmānam—himself (by the body, mind and self); rahasi—in a
secluded place; sthitaḥ—being so situated; ekākī—alone; yata-cittātmā—always
careful in mind; nirāśīḥ—without being attracted by anything else;
aparigrahaḥ—free from the feeling of possessiveness.

TRANSLATION

A transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the Supreme
Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and should always carefully
control his mind. He should be free from desires and feelings of possessiveness.

PURPORT

Kṛṣṇa is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means, concisely, to be always
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. But those who are
attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localized Supersoul are also partially
Kṛṣṇa conscious, because impersonal Brahman is the spiritual ray of Kṛṣṇa and
Supersoul is the all-pervading partial expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Thus the
impersonalist and the meditator are also indirectly Kṛṣṇa conscious. A directly
Kṛṣṇa conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such a devotee
knows what is meant by Brahman or Paramātmā. His knowledge of the Absolute Truth
is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and the meditative yogī are imperfectly
Kṛṣṇa conscious.

Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantly engaged in
their particular pursuits so that they may come to the highest perfection sooner
or later. The first business of a transcendentalist is to keep the mind always
on Kṛṣṇa. One should always think of Kṛṣṇa and not forget Him even for a moment.
Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samādhi or trance. In order
to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in seclusion and avoid
disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful to accept favorable
and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his realization. And, in perfect
determination, he should not hanker after unnecessary material things that
entangle him by feelings of possessiveness.

All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when one is
directly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness because direct Kṛṣṇa consciousness means
self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material
possessiveness. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī characterizes Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this
way:

anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ
vairāgyam ucyate prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ mumukṣubhiḥ
parityāgo vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate.

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 2.255–256)

“When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts everything
in relation to Kṛṣṇa, one is rightly situated above possessiveness. On the other
hand, one who rejects everything without knowledge of its relationship to Kṛṣṇa
is not as complete in his renunciation.”

A Kṛṣṇa conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and thus
he is always free from feelings of personal possession. As such, he has no
hankering for anything on his own personal account. He knows how to accept
things in favor of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and how to reject things unfavorable to
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He is always aloof from material things because he is
always transcendental, and he is always alone, having nothing to do with persons
not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the
perfect yogī.
