### 6.18


yadā viniyataṁ cittam

ātmany evāvatiṣṭhate

nispṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyo

yukta ity ucyate tadā

yadā—when; viniyatam—particularly disciplined; cittam—the mind and its
activities; ātmani—in the Transcendence; eva—certainly; avatiṣṭhate—becomes
situated; nispṛhaḥ—devoid of; sarva—all kinds of; kāmebhyaḥ—material desires;
yuktaḥ—well situated in yoga; iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; tadā—at that time.

**TRANSLATION**

When the yogī, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and
becomes situated in Transcendence—devoid of all material desires—he is said to
have attained yoga.

**PURPORT**

The activities of the yogī are distinguished from those of an ordinary person by
his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material desires—of which sex is
the chief. A perfect yogī is so well disciplined in the activities of the mind
that he can no longer be disturbed by any kind of material desire. This
perfectional stage can automatically be attained by persons in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, as is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.4.18–20):

sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānavarṇane karau harer
mandira-mārjanādiṣu śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane
dṛśau tad-bhṛtyagātra-sparśe ’ṅga-saṅgamam ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe
śrīmat tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe śiro
hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā
yathottama-śloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

“King Ambarīṣa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa;
then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing the transcendental
qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple of the Lord, his ears in
hearing of the activities of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the transcendental
forms of the Lord, his body in touching the bodies of the devotees, his sense of
smell in smelling the scents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord, his tongue
in tasting the tulasī leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs in
going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head in offering
obeisances unto the Lord and his desires in executing the mission of the Lord.
All these transcendental activities are quite befitting a pure devotee.”

This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the followers of
the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and practical for a person in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as is apparent in the above description of the engagements
of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Unless the mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by
constant remembrance, such transcendental engagements are not practical. In the
devotional service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed activities are
called arcanā, or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord. The senses
and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is not practical. Therefore,
for people in general—especially those who are not in the renounced order of
life—transcendental engagement of the senses and the mind as described above is
the perfect process for transcendental achievement, which is called yukta in the
Bhagavad-gītā.

### 6.19


yathā dīpo nivāta-stho

neṅgate sopamā smṛtā

yogino yata-cittasya

yuñjato yogam ātmanaḥ

yathā—as; dīpaḥ—a lamp; nivātasthaḥ—in a place without wind; na—does not;
iṅgate—waver; sā upamā—compared to that; smṛtā—likened; yoginaḥ—of the yogī;
yata-cittasya—whose mind is controlled; yuñjataḥ—constantly engaged in;
yogam—meditation; ātmanaḥ—on Transcendence.

**TRANSLATION**

As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist, whose
mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on the transcendent
Self.

**PURPORT**

A truly Kṛṣṇa conscious person, always absorbed in Transcendence, in constant
undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steady as a lamp in a
windless place.

### 6.20-23


yatroparamate cittaṁ

niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā

yatra caivātmanātmānaṁ

paśyann ātmani tuṣyati

sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad

buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam

vetti yatra na caivāyaṁ

sthitaś calati tattvataḥ

yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ

manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

yasmin sthito na duḥkhena

guruṇāpi vicālyate

taṁ vidyād duḥkha-saṁyoga-

viyogaṁ yoga-saṁjñitam

yatra—in that state of affairs; uparamate—when one feels transcendental
happiness; cittam—mental activities; niruddham—restrained from matter;
yoga-sevayā—by performance of yoga; yatra—in that; ca—also; eva—certainly;
ātmanā—by the pure mind; ātmānam—self; paśyan—realizing the position; ātmani—in
the self; tuṣyati—becomes satisfied; sukham—happiness; ātyantikam—supreme;
yat—in which; tat—that; buddhi—intelligence; grāhyam—acceptable;
atīndriyam—transcendental; vetti—knows; yatra—wherein; na—never; ca—also;
eva—certainly; ayam—in this; sthitaḥ—situated; calati—moves; tattvataḥ—from the
truth; yam—that which; labdhvā—by attainment; ca—also; aparam—any other;
lābham—gain; manyate—does not mind; na—never; adhikam—more than that; tataḥ—from
that; yasmin—in which; sthitaḥ—being situated; na—never; duḥkhena—by miseries;
guruṇāpi—even though very difficult; vicālyate—becomes shaken; tam—that;
vidyāt—you must know; duḥkha-saṁyoga—miseries of material contact;
viyogam—extermination; yoga-samjñitam—trance in yoga.

**TRANSLATION**

The stage of perfection is called trance, or samādhi, when one’s mind is
completely restrained from material mental activities by practice of yoga. This
is characterized by one’s ability to see the self by the pure mind and to relish
and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless
transcendental happiness and enjoys himself through transcendental senses.
Established thus, one never departs from the truth, and upon gaining this he
thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never
shaken, even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom
from all miseries arising from material contact.

**PURPORT**

By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material concepts. This
is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. And after this, one becomes
situated in trance, or samādhi which means that the yogī realizes the Supersoul
through transcendental mind and intelligence, without any of the misgivings of
identifying the self with the Superself. Yoga practice is more or less based on
the principles of the Patañjali system. Some unauthorized commentators try to
identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the monists think this to
be liberation, but they do not understand the real purpose of the Patañjali
system of yoga. There is an acceptance of transcendental pleasure in the
Patañjali system, but the monists do not accept this transcendental pleasure out
of fear of jeopardizing the theory of oneness. The duality of knowledge and
knower is not accepted by the nondualist, but in this verse transcendental
pleasure—realized through transcendental senses—is accepted. And this is
corroborated by the Patañjali Muni, the famous exponent of the yoga system. The
great sage declares in his Yoga-sūtras: puruṣārtha-śūnyānāṁ guṇānāṁ
pratiprasavaḥ kaivalyaṁ svarūpa-pratiṣṭhā vā citi-śaktir iti.

This citi-śakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Puruṣārtha means
material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and, at the end,
the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This “oneness with the Supreme” is
called kaivalyam by the monist. But according to Patañjali, this kaivalyam is an
internal, or transcendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of
his constitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya, this state of
affairs is called ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam, or clearance of the impure mirror of
the mind. This “clearance” is actually liberation, or
bhava-mahādāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam. The theory of nirvāṇa—also preliminary—corresponds
with this principle. In the Bhāgavatam this is called svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ.
The Bhagavad-gītā also confirms this situation in this verse.

After nirvāṇa, or material cessation, there is the manifestation of spiritual
activities, or devotional service of the Lord, known as Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In
the words of the Bhāgavatam, svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ: this is the “real life of
the living entity.” Māyā, or illusion, is the condition of spiritual life
contaminated by material infection. Liberation from this material infection does
not mean destruction of the original eternal position of the living entity.
Patañjali also accepts this by his words kaivalyam svarūpa-pratiṣṭhā vā
citi-śaktir iti. This citi-śakti or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This
is confirmed in the Vedānta-sūtras as ānandamayo ’bhyāsāt. This natural
transcendental pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and is easily achieved by
execution of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga. Bhaktiyoga will be vividly
described in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā.

In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kinds of
samādhi, called samprajñāta-samādhi and asamprajñāta-samādhi. When one becomes
situated in the transcendental position by various philosophical researches, it
is called samprajñāta-samādhi. In the asamprajñāta-samādhi there is no longer
any connection with mundane pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all
sorts of happiness derived from the senses. When the yogī is once situated in
that transcendental position, he is never shaken from it. Unless the yogī is
able to reach this position, he is unsuccessful. Today’s so-called yoga
practice, which involves various sense pleasures, is contradictory. A yogī
indulging in sex and intoxication is a mockery. Even those yogīs who are
attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the process of yoga are not perfectly
situated. If the yogīs are attracted by the by-products of yoga, then they
cannot attain the stage of perfection, as is stated in this verse. Persons,
therefore, indulging in the make-show practice of gymnastic feats or siddhis
should know that the aim of yoga is lost in that way.

The best practice of yoga in this age is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is not
baffling. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person is so happy in his occupation that he does
not aspire after any other happiness. There are many impediments, especially in
this age of hypocrisy, to practicing haṭha-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, and jñāna-yoga,
but there is no such problem in executing karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.

As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of the body,
namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person who is in pure
bhakti-yoga or in Kṛṣṇa consciousness does not arouse the senses while meeting
the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts the bare necessities of life, making
the best use of a bad bargain, and enjoys transcendental happiness in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. He is callous toward incidental occurrences—such as accidents,
disease, scarcity and even the death of a most dear relative—but he is always
alert to execute his duties in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or bhakti-yoga. Accidents
never deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, āgamāpāyino
’nityās tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. He endures all such incidental occurences
because he knows that they come and go and do not affect his duties. In this way
he achieves the highest perfection in yoga practice.

### 6.24


sa niścayena yoktavyo

yogo ’nirviṇṇa-cetasā

saṅkalpa-prabhavān kāmāṁs

tyaktvā sarvān aśeṣataḥ

manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ

viniyamya samantataḥ

saḥ—that yoga system; niścayena—with firm determination; yoktavyaḥ—must be
practiced; yogaḥ—in such practice; anirviṇṇa-cetasā—without deviation;
saṅkalpa—material desires; prabhavān—born of; kāmān—sense gratification;
tyaktvā—giving up; sarvān—all; aśeṣatah—completely; manasā—by the mind;
eva—certainly; indriya-grāmam—the full set of senses; viniyamya—regulating;
samantataḥ—from all sides.

**TRANSLATION**

One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating determination
and faith. One should abandon, without exception, all material desires born of
false ego and thus control all the senses on all sides by the mind.

**PURPORT**

The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently prosecute the
practice without deviation. One should be sure of success at the end and pursue
this course with great perserverance, not becoming discouraged if there is any
delay in the attainment of success. Success is sure for the rigid practitioner.
Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvāmī says:

utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt tat tat karma-pravartanāt saṅga-tyāgāt satovṛtteḥ
ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

“The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with full-hearted
enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by following the prescribed duties
in the association of devotees and by engaging completely in activities of
goodness.”

As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow who lost her
eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on the shore of the
ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its waves. The sparrow became
very upset and asked the ocean to return her eggs. The ocean did not even
consider her appeal. So the sparrow decided to dry up the ocean. She began to
pick out the water in her small beak, and everyone laughed at her for her
impossible determination. The news of her activity spread, and at last Garuḍa,
the gigantic bird carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, heard it. He became compassionate
toward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow. Garuḍa was very
pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and he promised to help. Thus
Garuḍa at once asked the ocean to return her eggs lest he himself take up the
work of the sparrow. The ocean was frightened at this, and returned the eggs.
Thus the sparrow became happy by the grace of Garuḍa.

Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone follows the principles with
great determination, the Lord will surely help, for God helps those who help
themselves.
