### 6.25


śanaiḥ śanair uparamed

buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā

ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā

na kiñcid api cintayet

śanaiḥ—gradually; śanaiḥ—step by step; uparamet—hesitated; buddhyā—by
intelligence; dhṛti-gṛhītayā—carrying the conviction; ātma-saṁstham—placed in
transcendence; manaḥ—mind; kṛtvā—doing so; na—nothing; kiñcit—anything else;
api—even; cintayet—be thinking of.

TRANSLATION

Gradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become situated in
trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind should be fixed on the Self
alone and should think of nothing else.

PURPORT

By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyāhāra. The mind, being controlled by conviction,
meditation, and cessation of the senses, should be situated in trance, or
samādhi. At that time there is no longer any danger of becoming engaged in the
material conception of life. In other words, although one is involved with
matter as long as the material body exists, one should not think about sense
gratification. One should think of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the
Supreme Self. This state is easily attained by directly practicing Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

### 6.26


yato yato niścalati

manaś cañcalam asthiram

tatas tato niyamyaitad

ātmany eva vaśaṁ nayet

yataḥ—whatever; yataḥ—wherever; niścalati—verily agitated; manaḥ—the mind;
cañcalam—flickering; asthiram—unsteady; tataḥ—from there; tataḥ—and thereafter;
niyamya—regulating; etat—this; ātmani—in the self; eva—certainly; vaśam—control;
nayet—must bring in.

TRANSLATION

From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady
nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under the control of
the Self.

PURPORT

The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized yogī has
to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One who controls the mind
(and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvāmī, or svāmī, and one who is
controlled by the mind is called godāsa, or the servant of the senses. A gosvāmī
knows the standard of sense happiness. In transcendental sense happiness, the
senses are engaged in the service of Hṛṣīkeśa or the supreme owner of the
senses—Kṛṣṇa. Serving Kṛṣṇa with purified senses is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
That is the way of bringing the senses under full control. What is more, that is
the highest perfection of yoga practice.

### 6.27


praśānta-manasaṁ hy enaṁ

yoginaṁ sukham uttamam

upaiti śānta-rajasaṁ

brahma-bhūtam akalmaṣam

praśānta—mind fixed on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; manasam—of one whose mind is so
fixed; hi—certainly; enam—this; yoginam—the yogī; sukham—happiness; uttamam—the
highest; upaiti—attains; śānta-rajasam—pacified passion; brahma-bhūtam—liberated
by identification with the Absolute; akalmaṣam—freed from all past sinful
reaction.

TRANSLATION

The yogī whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest happiness. By
virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated; his mind is peaceful, his
passions are quieted, and he is freed from sin.

PURPORT

Brahma-bhūta is the state of being free from material contamination and situated
in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhate parām (### .
18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, the Absolute, until one’s
mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ.
To be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, or to
remain in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is to be factually liberated from the mode of
passion and all material contamination.

### 6.28


yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ

yogī vigata-kalmaṣaḥ

sukhena brahma-saṁsparśam

atyantaṁ sukham aśnute

yuñjan—thus being engaged in yoga practice; evam—thus; sadā—always;
ātmānam—self; yogī—one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata—is freed
from; kalmaṣaḥ—all material contamination; sukhena—in transcendental happiness;
brahma-saṁsparśam—being in constant touch with the Supreme; atyantam—highest;
sukham—happiness; aśnute—attains.

TRANSLATION

Steady in the Self, being freed from all material contamination, the yogī
achieves the highest perfectional stage of happiness in touch with the Supreme
Consciousness.

PURPORT

Self-realization means knowing one’s constitutional position in relationship to
the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel of the Supreme, and his
position is to render transcendental service to the Lord. This transcendental
contact with the Supreme is called brahma-saṁsparśa.

### 6.29


sarva-bhūta-stham ātmānaṁ

sarva-bhūtāni cātmani

īkṣate yoga-yuktātmā

sarvatra sama-darśanaḥ

sarva-bhūta-stham—situated in all beings; ātmānam—the Supersoul; sarva—all;
bhūtāni—entities; ca—also; ātmani—in the Self; īkṣate—does see;
yoga-yukta-ātmā—one who is dovetailed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
sarvatra—everywhere; sama-darśanaḥ—seeing equally.

TRANSLATION

A true yogī observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being in Me. Indeed,
the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.

PURPORT

A Kṛṣṇa conscious yogī is the perfect seer because he sees Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme,
situated in everyone’s heart as Supersoul (Paramātmā). Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati. The Lord in His Paramātmā feature is situated within
both the heart of the dog and that of a brāhmaṇa. The perfect yogī knows that
the Lord is eternally transcendental and is not materially affected by His
presence in either a dog or a brāhmaṇa. That is the supreme neutrality of the
Lord. The individual soul is also situated in the individual heart, but he is
not present in all hearts. That is the distinction between the individual soul
and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice of yoga cannot see
so clearly. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person can see Kṛṣṇa in the heart of both the
believer and nonbeliever. In the smṛti this is confirmed as follows: ātatatvāc
ca mātṛtvād ātmā hi paramo hariḥ.

The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and the maintainer.
As the mother is neutral to all different kinds of children, the Supreme Father
(or Mother) is also. Consequently the Supersoul is always in every living being.
Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of the Lord. As
will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has, primarily, two
energies—the spiritual (or superior) and the material (or inferior). The living
entity, although part of the superior energy, is conditioned by the inferior
energy; the living entity is always in the Lord’s energy. Every living entity is
situated in Him in one way or another. The yogī sees equally because he sees
that all living entities, although in different situations according to the
results of fruitive work, in all circumstances remain the servants of God. While
in the material energy, the living entity serves the material senses; and while
in spiritual energy, he serves the Supreme Lord directly. In either case the
living entity is the servant of God. This vision of equality is perfect in a
person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 6.30


yo māṁ paśyati sarvatra

sarvaṁ ca mayi paśyati

tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśyāmi

sa ca me na praṇaśyati

yaḥ—whoever; mām—Me; paśyati—sees; sarvatra—everywhere; sarvam—everything;
ca—and; mayi—in Me; paśyati—he sees; tasya—his; aham—I; na—not; praṇaśyāmi—am
lost; saḥ—he; ca—also; me—to Me; na—nor; praṇaśyati—is lost.

TRANSLATION

For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost, nor
is he ever lost to Me.

PURPORT

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness certainly sees Lord Kṛṣṇa everywhere, and he
sees everything in Kṛṣṇa. Such a person may appear to see all separate
manifestations of the material nature, but in each and every instance he is
conscious of Kṛṣṇa, knowing that everything is the manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s
energy. Nothing can exist without Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of
everything—this is the basic principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the development of love of Kṛṣṇa—a position
transcendental even to material liberation. It is the stage beyond
self-realization at which the devotee becomes one with Kṛṣṇa in the sense that
Kṛṣṇa becomes everything for the devotee, and the devotee becomes full in loving
Kṛṣṇa. An intimate relationship between the Lord and the devotee then exists. In
that stage, the living entity attains his immortality. Nor is the Personality of
Godhead ever out of the sight of the devotee. To merge in Kṛṣṇa is spiritual
annihilation. A devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā:

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti yaṁ
śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee whose
eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form of
Śyāmasundara situated within the heart of the devotee." (Bs. 5.38)

At this stage, Lord Kṛṣṇa never disappears from the sight of the devotee, nor
does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case of a yogī who sees the
Lord as Paramātmā within the heart, the same applies. Such a yogī turns into a
pure devotee and cannot bear to live for a moment with out seeing the Lord
within himself.

### 6.31


sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ yo māṁ

bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ

sarvathā vartamāno ’pi

sa yogī mayi vartate

sarva-bhūta-sthitam—situated in everyone’s heart; yaḥ—he who; mām—unto Me;
bhajati—serves in devotional service; ekatvam—oneness; āsthitaḥ—thus situated;
sarvathā—in all respects; vartamānaḥ—being situated; api—in spite of; saḥ—he;
yogī—transcendentalist; mayi—unto Me; vartate—remains.

TRANSLATION

The yogī who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures are one
worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.

PURPORT

A yogī who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within himself the
plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa as Viṣṇu—with four hands, holding conchshell, wheel,
club and lotus flower. The yogī should know that Viṣṇu is not different from
Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa in this form of Supersoul is situated in everyone’s heart.
Furthermore, there is no difference between the innumerable Supersouls present
in the innumerable hearts of living entities. Nor is there a difference between
a Kṛṣṇa conscious person always engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Kṛṣṇa and a perfect yogī engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogī in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness—even though he may be engaged in various activities while in
material existence—remains always situated in Kṛṣṇa. This is confirmed in the
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī: nikhileṣu avasthāsu jīvanmukta sa
ucyate. A devotee of the Lord, always acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is
automatically liberated. In the Nārada-pañcarātra this is confirmed in this way:

dik-kālādy-anavacchinne kṛṣṇe ceto vidhāya ca tanmayo bhavati kṣipraṁ jīvo
brahmaṇi yojayet.

“By concentrating one’s attention on the transcendental form of Kṛṣṇa, who is
all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in thinking of
Kṛṣṇa and then attains the happy state of transcendental association with Him.”

Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice. This very
understanding that Kṛṣṇa is present as Paramātmā in everyone’s heart makes the
yogī faultless. The Vedas confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as
follows:

eko ’pi san bahudhā yo ’vabhāti aiśvaryād rūpam ekaṁ ca sūryavad bahudheyate.

“Viṣṇu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His inconceivable
potency, in spite of His one form, He is present everywhere. As the sun, He
appears in many places at once.”


### 6.32


ātmaupamyena sarvatra

samaṁ paśyati yo ’rjuna

sukhaṁ vā yadi vā duḥkhaṁ

sa yogī paramo mataḥ

ātma—self; aupamyena—by comparison; sarvatra—everywhere; samam—equality;
paśyati—sees; yaḥ—he who; arjuna—O Arjuna; sukham—happiness; vā—or; yadi—if;
vā—or; duḥkham—distress; saḥ—such; yogī—transcendentalist; paramaḥ—perfect;
mataḥ—considered.

TRANSLATION

He is a perfect yogī who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality
of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna!

PURPORT

One who is Kṛṣṇa conscious is a perfect yogī; he is aware of everyone’s
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. The cause of the
distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with God. And
the cause of happiness is knowing Kṛṣṇa to be the supreme enjoyer of all the
activities of the human being. Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor of all lands and planets.
The perfect yogī is the sincerest friend of all living entities. He knows that
the living being who is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected
to the threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship with
