### 2.46


yāvān artha udapāne

sarvataḥ samplutodake

tāvān sarveṣu vedeṣu

brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ

yāvān—all that; arthaḥ—is meant; udapāne—in a well of water; sarvataḥ—in all
respects; sampluta-udake—in a great reservoir of water; tāvān—similarly;
sarveṣu—in all; vedeṣu—Vedic literatures; brāhmaṇasya—of the man who knows the
Supreme Brahman; vijānataḥ—of one who is in complete knowledge.

TRANSLATION

All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by the
great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas can be
served to one who knows the purpose behind them.

PURPORT

The rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kāṇḍa division of the Vedic
literature are to encourage gradual development of self-realization. And the
purpose of self-realization is clearly stated in the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gītā (15.15): the purpose of studying the Vedas is to know Lord Kṛṣṇa,
the primeval cause of everything. So, self-realization means understanding Kṛṣṇa
and one’s eternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living entities
with Kṛṣṇa is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā. The
living entities are parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa; therefore, revival of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness by the individual living entity is the highest perfectional stage
of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.7) as
follows:

aho bata śvapaco’to garīyān yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam tepus tapas te
juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te.

“O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a low
family like that of a cāṇḍāla [dog eater], is situated on the highest platform
of self-realization. Such a person must have performed all kinds of penances and
sacrifices according to Vedic rituals and studied the Vedic literatures many,
many times after taking his bath in all the holy places of pilgrimage. Such a
person is considered to be the best of the Āryan family.” So one must be
intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the Vedas, without being
attached to the rituals only, and must not desire to be elevated to the heavenly
kingdoms for a better quality of sense gratification. It is not possible for the
common man in this age to follow all the rules and regulations of the Vedic
rituals and the injunctions of the Vedāntas and the Upaniṣads. It requires much
time, energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the Vedas. This
is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic culture is served,
however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, as recommended by Lord Caitanya,
the deliverer of all fallen souls. When Lord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic
scholar, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of
the Lord like a sentimentalist instead of studying Vedānta philosophy, the Lord
replied that His spiritual master found Him to be a great fool, and thus he
asked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa. He did so, and became ecstatic
like a madman. In this age of Kali, most of the population is foolish and not
adequately educated to understand Vedānta philosophy; the best purpose of
Vedānta philosophy is served by inoffensively chanting the holy name of the
Lord. Vedānta is the last word in Vedic wisdom, and the author and knower of the
Vedānta philosophy is Lord Kṛṣṇa; and the highest Vedantist is the great soul
who takes pleasure in chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the ultimate
purpose of all Vedic mysticism.

### 2.47


karmaṇy evādhikāras te

mā phaleṣu kadācana

mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr

mā te saṅgo ’stv akarmaṇi

karmaṇi—prescribed duties; eva—certainly; adhikāraḥ—right; te—of you; mā—never;
phaleṣu—in the fruits; kadācana—at any time; mā—never; karma-phala—in the result
of the work; hetuḥ—cause; bhūḥ—become; mā—never; te—of you; saṅgaḥ—attachment;
astu—be there; akarmaṇi—in not doing.

TRANSLATION

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to
the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of
your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.

PURPORT

There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious work, and
inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performed while one is in the
modes of material nature. Capricious work means actions without the sanction of
authority, and inaction means not performing one’s prescribed duties. The Lord
advised that Arjuna not be inactive, but that he perform his prescribed duty
without being attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of his
work is also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of the
result of such actions.

As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted into three
subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desired activities.
Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, is done without desire for
results. As one has to do it, obligatory work is action in the mode of goodness.
Work with results becomes the cause of bondage; therefore such work is not
auspicious. Everyone has his proprietory right in regard to prescribed duties,
but should act without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory
duties doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.

Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of duty without
attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is another side of
attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path of salvation. Any
attachment, positive or negative, is cause for bondage. Inaction is sinful.
Therefore, fighting as a matter of duty was the only auspicious path of
salvation for Arjuna.

### 2.48


yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā dhanañjaya

siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā

samatvaṁ yoga ucyate

yoga-sthaḥ—steadfast in yoga; kuru—perform; karmāṇi—your duty;
saṅgam—attachment; tyaktvā—having abandoned; dhanañjaya—O Dhanañjaya;
siddhi-asiddhyoḥ—in success and failure; samaḥ—the same; bhūtvā—having become;
samatvam—evenness of mind; yogaḥ—yoga; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all attachment to
success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.

PURPORT

Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga? Yoga means
to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling the ever-disturbing
senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is the Lord. And because He Himself
is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has nothing to do with the results of the
fight. Gain or victory are Kṛṣṇa’s concern; Arjuna is simply advised to act
according to the dictation of Kṛṣṇa. The following of Kṛṣṇa’s dictation is real
yoga, and this is practiced in the process called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. By Kṛṣṇa
consciousness only can one give up the sense of proprietorship. One has to
become the servant of Kṛṣṇa, or the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is the
right way to discharge duty in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which alone can help one to
act in yoga.

Arjuna is a kṣatriya, and as such he is participating in the varṇāśrama-dharma
institution. It is said in the Viṣṇu Puraṇa that in the varṇāśrama-dharma, the
whole aim is to satisfy Viṣṇu. No one should satisfy himself, as is the rule in
the material world, but one should satisfy Kṛṣṇa. So, unless one satisfies
Kṛṣṇa, one cannot correctly observe the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma.
Indirectly, Arjuna was advised to act as Kṛṣṇa told him.

### 2.49


dūreṇa hy avaraṁ karma

buddhi-yogād dhanañjaya

buddhau śaraṇam anviccha

kṛpaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ

dūreṇa—by discarding it at a long distance; hi—certainly; avaram—abominable;
karma—activities; buddhi-yogāt—on the strength of Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
dhanañjaya—O conqueror of wealth; buddhau—in such consciousness; śaraṇam—full
surrender; anviccha—desire; kṛpaṇāḥ—the misers; phala-hetavaḥ—those desiring
fruitive action.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanañjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional service, and
surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of
their work are misers.

PURPORT

One who has actually come to understand one’s constitutional position as the
eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save working in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means transcendental loving
service to the Lord. Such devotional service is the right course of action for
the living entity. Only misers desire to enjoy the fruit of their own work just
to be further entangled in material bondage. Except for work in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, all activities are abominable because they continually bind the
worker to the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness for the
satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. Misers do not know how to utilize the assets of riches
which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor. One should spend all
energies working in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that will make one’s life
successful. Like the misers, unfortunate persons do not employ their human
energy in the service of the Lord.

### 2.50


buddhi-yukto jahātīha

ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte

tasmād yogāya yujyasva

yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam

buddhi-yuktaḥ—one who is engaged in devotional service; jahāti—can get rid of;
iha—in this life; ubhe—in both; sukṛta-duṣkṛte—in good and bad results;
tasmāt—therefore; yogāya—for the sake of devotional service; yujyasva—be so
engaged; yogaḥ—Kṛṣṇa consciousness; karmasu—in all activities; kauśalam—art.

TRANSLATION

A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad actions
even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, which is the art of all
work.

PURPORT

Since time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various reactions
of his good and bad work, As such, he is continuously ignorant of his real
constitutional position. One’s ignorance can be removed by the instruction of
the Bhagavad-gītā which teaches one to surrender unto Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa in all
respects and become liberated from the chained victimization of action and
reaction, birth after birth. Arjuna is therefore advised to act in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, the purifying process of resultant action.

### 2.51


karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi

phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ

janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ

padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam

karma-jam—because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktāḥ—being done in devotional
service; hi—certainly; phalam—results; tyaktvā—giving up; manīṣiṇaḥ—devotees who
are great sages; janma-bandha—the bondage of birth and death;
vinirmuktāḥ—liberated souls; padam—position; gacchanti—reach; anāmayam—without
miseries.

TRANSLATION

The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and free
themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the fruits of action
in the material world. In this way they can attain that state beyond all
miseries.

PURPORT

The liberated living entities seek that place where there are no material
miseries. The Bhāgavatam says:

samāśritā ye padapallava-plavaṁ mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ bhāvambudhir
vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām

(Bhāg. 10.14.58)

“For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda or the giver of
mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf’s
hoofprint. Param padam, or the place where there are no material miseries, or
Vaikuṇṭha, is his goal, not the place where there is danger in every step of
life.”

Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a miserable
place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance only, less
intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by fruitive activities,
thinking that resultant actions will make them happy. They do not know that no
kind of material body anywhere within the universe can give life without
miseries. The miseries of life, namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are
present everywhere within the material world. But one who understands his real
constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus knows the
position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes qualified to enter into the
Vaikuṇṭha planets, where there is neither material, miserable life, nor the
influence of time and death. To know one’s constitutional position means to know
also the sublime position of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living
entity’s position and the Lord’s position are on the same level is to be
understood to be in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the
devotional service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the way
for the repetition of birth and death. But one who, understanding that his
position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord, at once
becomes eligible for Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Service for the cause of the Lord is called
karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words, devotional service to the Lord.
