### 2.52


yadā te moha-kalilaṁ

buddhir vyatitariṣyati

tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ

śrotavyasya śrutasya ca

yadā—when; te—your; moha—illusory; kalilam—dense forest; buddhiḥ—transcendental
service with intelligence; vyatitariṣyati—surpasses; tadā—at that time;
gantāsi—you shall go; nirvedam—callousness; śrotavyasya—all that is to be heard;
śrutasya—all that is already heard; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion, you shall
become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is to be heard.

PURPORT

There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the Lord of
those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simply by devotional
service to the Lord. When a person factually understands Kṛṣṇa and his
relationship with Kṛṣṇa, he naturally becomes completely indifferent to the
rituals of fruitive activities, even though an experienced brāhmaṇa. Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī, a great devotee and ācārya in the line of the devotees, says:

sandhyā-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoḥ snāna tubhyaṁ namo bho devāḥ pitaraś
ca tarpaṇa-vidhau nāhaṁ kṣamaḥ kṣamyatām yatra kvāpi niṣadya yādava-kulottamasya
kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ smāraṁ smāram aghaṁ harāmi tad alaṁ manye kim anyena me.

“O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to You. Bathing, I offer my
obeisances unto You. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuse me for my
inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I can remember the great
descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Kṛṣṇa], the enemy of Kaṁsa, and thereby I can
free myself from all sinful bondage. I think this is sufficient for me.”

The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending all
kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the morning, offering
respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
and is engaged in His transcendental loving service, one becomes indifferent to
all these regulative principles because he has already attained perfection. If
one can reach the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord
Kṛṣṇa, he has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as
recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not understood
that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Kṛṣṇa and simply engages in the
rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such engagements. Persons in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness transcend the limit of śabda-brahma, or the range of the
Vedas and Upaniṣads.

### 2.53


śruti-vipratipannā te

yadā sthāsyati niścalā

samādhāv acalā buddhis

tadā yogam avāpsyasi

śruti—Vedic revelation; vipratipannā—without being influenced by the fruitive
results of the Vedas; te—your; yadā—when; sthāsyati—remains; niścalā—unmoved;
samādhau—in transcendental consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
acalā—unflinching; buddhiḥ—intelligence; tadā—at that time;
yogam—self-realization; avāpsyasi—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas, and
when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization, then you will have
attained the Divine consciousness.

PURPORT

To say that one is in samādhi is to say that one has fully realized Kṛṣṇa
consciousness; that is, one in full samādhi has realized Brahman, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān. The highest perfection of self-realization is to understand that one
is eternally the servitor of Kṛṣṇa and that one’s only business is to discharge
one’s duties in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person, or unflinching
devotee of the Lord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas nor be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenly
kingdom. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one comes directly into communion with Kṛṣṇa,
and thus all directions from Kṛṣṇa may be understood in that transcendental
state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities and attain conclusive
knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders of Kṛṣṇa or His representative,
the spiritual master.


### 2.54


arjuna uvāca

sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā

samādhi-sthasya keśava

sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta

kim āsīta vrajeta kim

arjuna uvāca—Arjuna said; sthita-prajñasya—of one who is situated in fixed Kṛṣṇa
consciousness; kā—what; bhāṣā—language; samādhi-sthasya—of one situated in
trance; keśava—O Kṛṣṇa; sthita-dhīḥ—one fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness; kim—what;
prabhāṣeta—speak; kim—how; āsīta—does remain; vrajeta—walk; kim—how.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: What are the symptoms of one whose consciousness is thus merged in
Transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his language? How does he sit, and
how does he walk?

PURPORT

As there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his particular
situation, similarly one who is Kṛṣṇa conscious has his particular
nature—talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a rich man has his symptoms
by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseased man has his symptoms, by which
he is known as diseased, or as a learned man has his symptoms, so a man in
transcendental consciousness of Kṛṣṇa has specific symptoms in various dealings.
One can know his specific symptoms from the Bhagavad-gītā. Most important is how
the man in Kṛṣṇa consciousness speaks, for speech is the most important quality
of any man. It is said that a fool is undiscovered as long as he does not speak,
and certainly a well-dressed fool cannot be identified unless he speaks, but as
soon as he speaks, he reveals himself at once. The immediate symptom of a Kṛṣṇa
conscious man is that he speaks only of Kṛṣṇa and of matters relating to Him.
Other symptoms then automatically follow, as stated below.

### 2.55


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

prajahāti yadā kāmān

sarvān pārtha mano-gatān

ātmany evātmanā tuṣṭaḥ

sthita-prajñas tadocyate

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahāti—gives up;
yadā—when; kāmān—desires for sense gratification; sarvān—of all varieties;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; manaḥ-gatān—of mental concoction; ātmani—in the pure
state of the soul; eva—certainly; ātmanā—by the purified mind; tuṣṭaḥ—satisfied;
sthita-prajñaḥ—transcendentally situated; tadā—at that time; ucyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: O Pārtha, when a man gives up all varieties of sense
desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind finds satisfaction
in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.

PURPORT

The Bhāgavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or
devotional service of the Lord, has all the good qualities of the great sages,
whereas a person who is not so transcendentally situated has no good
qualifications, because he is sure to be taking refuge in his own mental
concoctions. Consequently, it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all
kinds of sense desire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such
sense desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
then, automatically, sense desires subside without extraneous efforts.
Therefore, one has to engage himself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness without hesitation,
for this devotional service will instantly help one on to the platform of
transcendental consciousness. The highly developed soul always remains satisfied
in himself by realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord.
Such a transcendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting from
petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural position of
eternally serving the Supreme Lord.

### 2.56


duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ

sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ

vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ

sthita-dhīr munir ucyate

duḥkheṣu—in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manāḥ—without being agitated in
mind; sukheṣu—in happiness; vigata-spṛhaḥ—without being too interested;
vīta—free from; rāga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhaḥ—anger; sthita-dhīḥ—one who
is steady; muniḥ—sage; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated
when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is
called a sage of steady mind.

PURPORT

The word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for mental
speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said that every muni
has a different angle of vision, and unless a muni differs from other munis, he
cannot be called a muni in the strict sense of the term. Nāsau munir yasya mataṁ
na binnam. But a sthita-dhī-muni as mentioned herein by the Lord, is different
from an ordinary muni The sthita-dhī-muni is always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for
he has exhausted all his business of creative speculation. He has surpassed the
stage of mental speculations and has come to the conclusion that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
or Vāsudeva, is everything. He is called a muni fixed in mind. Such a fully
Kṛṣṇa conscious person is not at all disturbed by the onslaughts of the
threefold miseries, for he accepts all miseries as the mercy of the Lord,
thinking himself only worthy of more trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he
sees that his miseries, by the grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest.
Similarly, when he is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself
unworthy of the happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord’s grace
that he is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better service to
the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring and active and
is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachment means accepting things
for one’s own sense gratification, and detachment is the absence of such sensual
attachment. But one fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has neither attachment nor
detachment because his life is dedicated in the service of the Lord.
Consequently he is not at all angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. A
Kṛṣṇa conscious person is always steady in his determination.

### 2.57


yaḥ sarvatrānabhisnehas

tat tat prāpya śubhāśubham

nābhinandati na dveṣṭi

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

yaḥ—one who; sarvatra—everywhere; anabhisnehaḥ—without affection; tat—that;
tat—that; prāpya—achieving; śubha—good; aśubham—evil; na—never;
abhinandati—prays; na—never; dveṣṭi—envies; tasya—his; prajñā—perfect knowledge;
pratiṣṭhita—fixed.

TRANSLATION

He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains good, nor
lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfect knowledge.

PURPORT

There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good or evil.
One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is unaffected by good
and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As long as one
is in the material world there is always the possibility of good and evil
because this world is full of duality. But one who is fixed in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is not affected by good and evil because he is simply concerned
with Kṛṣṇa, who is all good absolute. Such consciousness in Kṛṣṇa situates one
in a perfect transcendental position called, technically, samādhi.

### 2.58


yadā saṁharate cāyaṁ

kūrmo ’ṅgānīva sarvaśaḥ

indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

yadā—when; saṁharate—winds up; ca—also; ayam—all these; kūrmaḥ—tortoise;
aṅgāni—limbs; iva—like; sarvaśaḥ—altogether; indriyāni—senses;
indriya-arthebhyaḥ—from the sense objects; tasya—his; prajñā—consciousness;
pratiṣṭhitā—fixed up.

TRANSLATION

One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise draws
his limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly situated in knowledge.

PURPORT

The test of a yogī, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able to control
the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, are servants of the
senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the senses. That is the answer
to the question as to how the yogī is situated. The senses are compared to
venomous serpents. They want to act very loosely and without restriction. The
yogī, or the devotee, must be very strong to control the serpents—like a snake
charmer. He never allows them to act independantly. There are many injunctions
in the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not’s, and some of them are
do’s. Unless one is able to follow the do’s and the do-not’s, restricting
oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to be firmly fixed in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. The best example, set herein, is the tortoise. The tortoise can
at any moment wind up his senses and exhibit them again at any time for
particular purposes. Similarly, the senses of the Kṛṣṇa conscious persons are
used only for some particular purpose in the service of the Lord and are
withdrawn otherwise. Keeping the senses always in the service of the Lord is the
example set by the analogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.
