### 2.66


nāsti buddhir ayuktasya

na cāyuktasya bhāvanā

na cābhāvayataḥ śāntir

aśāntasya kutaḥ sukham

na asti—there cannot be; buddhiḥ—transcendental intelligence; ayuktasya—of one
who is not connected (with Kṛṣṇa consciousness); na—neither; ca—and;
ayuktasya—of one devoid of Kṛṣṇa consciousness; bhāvanā—mind fixed in happiness;
na—neither; ca—and; abhāvayataḥ—one who is not fixed; śāntiḥ—peace; aśāntasya—of
the unpeaceful; kutaḥ—where is; sukham—happiness.

TRANSLATION

One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a controlled
mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no possibility of peace.
And how can there be any happiness without peace?

PURPORT

Unless one is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no possibility of peace. So it is
confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one understands that Kṛṣṇa is
the only enjoyer of all the good results of sacrifice and penance, and that He
is the proprietor of all universal manifestations, that He is the real friend of
all living entities, then only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance
is due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Kṛṣṇa is the
enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then one can, with a
steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who is engaged without a
relationship with Kṛṣṇa is certainly always in distress and is without peace,
however much one may make a show of peace and spiritual advancement in life.
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be
achieved only in relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

### 2.67


indriyāṇāṁ hi caratāṁ

yan mano ’nuvidhīyate

tad asya harati prajñāṁ

vāyur nāvam ivāmbhasi

indriyāṇām—of the senses; hi—certainly; caratām—while herding over; yat—that;
manaḥ—mind; anuvidhīyate—becomes constantly engaged; tat—that; asya—his;
harati—takes away; prajñām—intelligence; vāyuḥ—wind; nāvam—a boat; iva—like;
ambhasi—on the water.

TRANSLATION

As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the senses on
which the mind focuses can carry away a man’s intelligence.

PURPORT

Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even one of
them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from the path of
transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, all
of the senses must be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for that is the correct
technique for controlling the mind.

### 2.68


tasmād yasya mahā-bāho

nigṛhītāni sarvaśaḥ

indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas

tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā

tasmāt—therefore; yasya—of one’s; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; nigṛhītāni—so
curbed down; sarvaśaḥ—all around; indriyāṇi—the senses; indriya-arthebhyaḥ—for
the sake of sense objects; tasya—his; prajñā—intelligence; pratiṣṭhitā—fixed.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their objects is
certainly of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly, the senses can be curbed not
by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in the service of the
Lord. One who has understood this—that only by Kṛṣṇa consciousness is one really
established in intelligence and that one should practice this art under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master—is called sādhaka, or a suitable
candidate for liberation.

### 2.69


yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī

yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni

sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

yā—what; niśā—is night; sarva—all; bhūtānām—of living entities; tasyām—in that;
jāgarti—wakeful; saṁyamī—the self-controlled; yasyām—in which; jāgrati—awake;
bhūtāni—all beings; sā—that is; niśā—night; paśyataḥ—for the introspective;
muneḥ—sage.

TRANSLATION

What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;
and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage.

PURPORT

There are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in material
activities for sense gratification, and the other is introspective and awake to
the cultivation of self-realization. Activities of the introspective sage, or
thoughtful man, are night for persons materially absorbed. Materialistic persons
remain asleep in such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization. The
introspective sage remains alert in the “night” of the materialistic men. The
sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement of spiritual
culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities, being asleep to
self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense pleasure, feeling sometimes happy
and sometimes distressed in his sleeping condition. The introspective man is
always indifferent to materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his
self-realization activities undisturbed by material reaction.

### 2.70


āpūryamāṇam acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ

samudram āpaḥ praviśanti yadvat

tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve

sa śāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

āpūryamāṇam—always filled; acala-pratiṣṭham—steadily situated; samudram—the
ocean; āpaḥ—water; praviśanti—enter; yadvat—as; tadvat—so; kāmāḥ—desires;
yam—unto one; praviśanti—enter; sarve—all; saḥ—that person; śāntim—peace;
āpnoti—achieves; na—not; kāma-kāmī—one who desires to fulfill desires.

TRANSLATION

A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter like
rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is always still—can alone
achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.

PURPORT

Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always, especially
during the rainy season, being filled with much more water. But the ocean
remains the same—steady; it is not agitated, nor does it cross beyond the limit
of its brink. That is also true of a person fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As
long as one has the material body, the demands of the body for sense
gratification will continue. The devotee, however, is not disturbed by such
desires because of his fullness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious man is not in need of
anything because the Lord fulfills all his material necessities. Therefore he is
like the ocean—always full in himself. Desires may come to him like the waters
of the rivers that flow into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and
he is not even slightly disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is
the proof of a Kṛṣṇa conscious man—one who has lost all inclinations for
material sense gratification, although the desires are present. Because he
remains satisfied in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, he can
remain steady, like the ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace. Others, however,
who fulfill desires even up to the limit of liberation, what to speak of
material success, never attain peace. The fruitive workers, the salvationists,
and also the yogīs who are after mystic powers, are all unhappy because of
unfulfilled desires. But the person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is happy in the
service of the Lord, and he has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not
even desire liberation from the so-called material bondage. The devotees of
Kṛṣṇa have no material desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.

### 2.71


vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān

pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ

nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ

sa śāntim adhigacchati

vihāya—after giving up; kāmān—all material desires for sense gratification;
yaḥ—the person; sarvān—all; pumān—a person; carati—lives; nihṣpṛhaḥ —desireless;
nirmamaḥ—without a sense of proprietorship; nirahaṅkāraḥ—without false ego;
saḥ—all; śāntim—perfect peace; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free
from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of
false ego—he alone can attain real peace.

PURPORT

To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense gratification. In
other words, desire for becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious is actually desirelessness. To
understand one’s actual position as the eternal servitor of Kṛṣṇa, without
falsely claiming this material body to be oneself and without falsely claiming
proprietorship over anything in the world, is the perfect stage of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. One who is situated in this perfect stage knows that because
Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for the
satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sense
satisfaction, but when he became fully Kṛṣṇa conscious he fought because Kṛṣṇa
wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire to fight, but for Kṛṣṇa the
same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desire for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa is
really desirelessness; it is not an artificial attempt to abolish desires. The
living entity cannot be desireless or senseless, but he does have to change the
quality of the desires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that
everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa (īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam), and therefore he does not
falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental knowledge is
based on self-realization—namely, knowing perfectly well that every living
entity is the eternal part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa in spiritual identity. and
therefore the eternal position of the living entity is never on the level of
Kṛṣṇa or greater than Him. This understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the
basic principle of real peace.

### 2.72


eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha

naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati

sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi

brahma-nirvāṇam ṛcchati

eṣā—this; brāhmī—spiritual; sthitiḥ—situation; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; na—never;
enām—this; prāpya—achieving; vimuhyati—bewilders; sthitvā—being so situated;
asyām—being so; anta-kāle—at the end of life; api—also;
brahma-nirvāṇam—spiritual (kingdom of God); ṛcchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which a man is
not bewildered. Being so situated, even at the hour of death, one can enter into
the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

One can attain Kṛṣṇa consciousness or divine life at once, within a second—or
one may not attain such a state of life even after millions of births. It is
only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact. Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja
attained this state of life just a few minutes before his death, by surrendering
unto Kṛṣṇa. Nirvāṇa means ending the process of materialistic life. According to
Buddhist philosophy, there is only void after the completion of this material
life, but Bhagavad-gītā teaches differently. Actual life begins after the
completion of this material life. For the gross materialist it is sufficient to
know that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for persons who are
spiritually advanced, there is another life after this materialistic life.
Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, he at once
attains the stage of Brahma-nirvāṇa. There is no difference between the kingdom
of God and the devotional service of the Lord. Since both of them are on the
absolute plane, to be engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord
is to have attained the spiritual kingdom. In the material world there are
activities of sense gratification, whereas in the spiritual world there are
activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Attainment of Kṛṣṇa consciousness even during
this life is immediate attainment of Brahman, and one who is situated in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness has certainly already entered into the kingdom of God.

Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brāhmī sthitiḥ means “not on
the platform of material activities.” Devotional service of the Lord is accepted
in the Bhagavad-gītā as the liberated stage. Therefore, brāhmī-sthitiḥ is
liberation from material bondage.

Śrīla Bhaktivinode Ṭhākur has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gītā as being the contents for the whole text. In the Bhagavad-gītā,
the subject matters are karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and bhakti-yoga. In the Second
Chapter karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga have been clearly discussed, and a glimpse of
bhakti-yoga has also been given, as the contents for the complete text.

Karma-yoga

### 3.1


arjuna uvāca

jyāyasī cet karmaṇas te

matā buddhir janārdana

tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ

niyojayasi keśava

arjunaḥ—Arjuna; uvāca—said; jyāyasī—speaking very highly; cet—although;
karmaṇaḥ—than fruitive action; te—your; matā—opinion; buddhiḥ—intelligence;
janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa; tat—therefore; kim—why; karmaṇi—in action; ghore—ghastly;
mām—me; niyojayasi—engaging me; keśava—O Kṛṣṇa.

