TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Janārdana, O Keśava, why do You urge me to engage in this ghastly
warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than fruitive work?

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa has very elaborately described the
constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a view to deliver His
intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material grief. And the path of
realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sometimes
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is misunderstood to be inertia, and one with such a
misunderstanding often withdraws to a secluded place to become fully Kṛṣṇa
conscious by chanting the holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa. But without being trained in
the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is not advisable to chant the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa in a secluded place where one may acquire only cheap adoration
from the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of Kṛṣṇa consciousness or
buddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement of knowledge, as something
like retirement from active life and the practice of penance and austerity at a
secluded place. In other words, he wanted to skillfully avoid the fighting by
using Kṛṣṇa consciousness as an excuse. But as a sincere student, he placed the
matter before his master and questioned Kṛṣṇa as to his best course of action.
In answer, Lord Kṛṣṇa elaborately explained karma-yoga, or work in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, in this Third Chapter.

### 3.2


vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena

buddhiṁ mohayasīva me

tad ekaṁ vada niścitya

yena śreyo ’ham āpnuyām

vyāmiśreṇa—by equivocal; iva—as; vākyena—words; buddhim—intelligence;
mohayasi—bewildering; iva—as; me—my; tat—therefore; ekam—only one; vada—please
tell; niścitya—ascertaining; yena—by which; śreyaḥ—real benefit; aham—I;
āpnuyām—may have it.

TRANSLATION

My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions. Therefore, please
tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.

PURPORT

In the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gītā, many different paths
were explained, such as sāṅkhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga, control of the senses by
intelligence, work without fruitive desire, and the position of the neophyte.
This was all presented unsystematically. A more organized outline of the path
would be necessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted to
clear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common man could accept
them without misinterpretation. Although Kṛṣṇa had no intention of confusing
Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna could not follow the process of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness—either by inertia or active service. In other words, by his
questions he is clearing the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness for all students who
seriously want to understand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gītā.

### 3.3


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣṭhā

purā proktā mayānagha

jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ

karma-yogena yoginām

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke—in the world;
asmin—this; dvi-vidhā—two kinds of; niṣṭhā—faith; purā—formerly; proktā—was
said; mayā—by Me; anagha—O sinless one; jñāna-yogena—by the linking process of
knowledge; sāṅkhyānām—of the empiric philosophers; karma-yogena—by the linking
process of devotion; yoginām—of the devotees.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: O sinless Arjuna, I have already explained that there are
two classes of men who realize the Self. Some are inclined to understand Him by
empirical, philosophical speculation, and others are inclined to know Him by
devotional work.

PURPORT

In the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures—namely sāṅkhya-yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In this verse,
the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sāṅkhya-yoga, or the analytical study
of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subject matter for persons who are
inclined to speculate and understand things by experimental knowledge and
philosophy. The other class of men work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as it is
explained in the 61st verse of the Second Chapter. The Lord has explained, also
in the 39th verse, that by working by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, one can be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore,
there is no flaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly explained in
the 61st verse—that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on the Supreme (or
more specifically, on Kṛṣṇa), and in this way all the senses can be brought
under control very easily. Therefore, both the yogas are interdependant, as
religion and philosophy. Religion without philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes
fanaticism, while philosophy without religion is mental speculation. The
ultimate goal is Kṛṣṇa, because the philosophers who are also sincerely
searching after the Absolute Truth come in the end to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This
is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. The whole process is to understand the real
position of the self in relation to the Superself. The indirect process is
philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may come to the point of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness; and the other process is directly connecting with
everything in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Of these two, the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness
is better because it does not depend on purifying the senses by a philosophical
process. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is itself the purifying process, and by the direct
method of devotional service it is simultaneously easy and sublime.

### 3.4


na karmaṇām anārambhān

naiṣkarmyaṁ puruṣo ’śnute

na ca sannyasanād eva

siddhiṁ samadhigacchati

na—without; karmaṇām—of the prescribed duties; anārambhāt—non-performance;
naiṣkarmyam—freedom from reaction; puruṣah—man; aśnute—achieve; na—nor; ca—also;
sannyasanāt—by renunciation; eva—simply; siddhim—success;
samadhigacchati—attain.

TRANSLATION

Not by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from reaction, nor by
renunciation alone can one attain perfection.

PURPORT

The renounced order of life can be accepted upon being purified by the discharge
of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just to purify the heart of
materialistic men. Without purification, one cannot attain success by abruptly
adopting the fourth order of life (sannyāsa). According to the empirical
philosophers, simply by adopting sannyāsa, or retiring from fruitive activities,
one at once becomes as good as Nārāyaṇa. But Lord Kṛṣṇa does not approve this
principle. Without purification of heart, sannyāsa is simply a disturbance to
the social order. On the other hand, if someone takes to the transcendental
service of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties, whatever he
may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord (buddhi-yoga).
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Even a slight performance of
such a principle enables one to overcome great difficulties.

### 3.5


na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api

jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt

kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma

sarvaḥ prakṛti-jair guṇaiḥ

na—nor; hi—certainly; kaścit—anyone; kṣaṇam—even a moment; api—also; jātu—even;
tiṣṭhati—stands; akarma-kṛt—without doing something; kāryate—is forced to do;
hi—certainly; avaśaḥ—helplessly; karma—work; sarvaḥ—everything; prakṛti-jaiḥ—out
of the modes of material nature; guṇaiḥ—by the qualities.

TRANSLATION

All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of the modes
of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing something, not even
for a moment.

PURPORT

It is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul to be
always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, the material body cannot
move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked by the spirit soul, which is
always active and cannot stop even for a moment. As such, the spirit soul has to
be engaged in the good work of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged
in occupations dictated by illusory energy. In contact with material energy, the
spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul from such affinities
it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoined in the śāstras. But
if the soul is engaged in his natural function of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whatever
he is able to do is good for him. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam affirms this:

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi yatra
kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ ko vārtha āpto ’bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ.

“If someone takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even though he may not follow the
prescribed duties in the śāstras nor execute the devotional service properly,
and even though he may fall down from the standard, there is no loss or evil for
him. But if he carries out all the injunctions for purification in the śāstras,
what does it avail him if he is not Kṛṣṇa conscious?” (Bhāg. 1.5.17) So the
purificatory process is necessary for reaching this point of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Therefore, sannyāsa, or any purificatory process, is to help
reach the ultimate goal of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, without which everything is
considered a failure.

### 3.6


karmendriyāṇi saṁyamya

ya āste manasā smaran

indriyārthān vimūḍhātmā

mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate

karma-indriyāṇi—the five working sense organs; saṁyamya—controlling; yaḥ—anyone
who; āste—remains; manasā—by mind; smaran—thinking; indriya-arthān—sense
objects; vimūḍha—foolish; ātmā—soul; mithyā-ācāraḥ—pretender; saḥ—he; ucyate—is
called.

TRANSLATION

One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind dwells on
sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender.

PURPORT

There are many pretenders who refuse to work in Kṛṣṇa consciousness but make a
show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind upon sense
enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy in order to bluff
sophisticated followers, but according to this verse these are the greatest
cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in any capacity of the social order,
but if one follows the rules and regulations of his particular status, he can
make gradual progress in purifying his existence. But he who makes a show of
being a yogī, while actually searching for the objects of sense gratification,
must be called the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks of
philosophy. His knowledge has no value because the effects of such a sinful
man’s knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the Lord. Such a
pretender’s mind is always impure, and therefore his show of yogic meditation
has no value whatsoever.

### 3.7


yas tv indriyāṇi manasā

niyamyārabhate ’rjuna

karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam

asaktaḥ sa viśiṣyate

yaḥ—one who; tu—but; indriyāṇi—senses; manasā—by the mind; niyamya—regulating;
ārabhate—begins; arjuna—O Arjuna; karma-indriyaiḥ—by the active sense organs;
karma-yogam—devotion; asaktaḥ—without attachment; saḥ—he; viśiṣyate—by far the
better.

TRANSLATION

On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages his active
organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by far superior.

PURPORT

Instead of becoming a pseudo-transcendentalist for the sake of wanton living and
sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one’s own business and execute
the purpose of life, which is to get free from material bondage and enter into
the kingdom of God. The prime svārtha-gati, or goal of self-interest, is to
reach Viṣṇu. The whole institution of varṇa and āśrama is designed to help us
reach this goal of life. A householder can also reach this destination by
regulated service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For self-realization, one can live a
controlled life, as prescribed in the śāstras, and continue carrying out his
business without attachment, and in that way make progress. Such a sincere
person who follows this method is far better situated than the false pretender
who adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheat the innocent public. A sincere
sweeper in the street is far better than the charlatan meditator who meditates
only for the sake of making a living.

### 3.8


niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ

karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ

śarīra-yātrāpi ca te

na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ

niyatam—prescribed; kuru—do; karma—duties; tvam—you; karma—work; jyāyaḥ—better;
hi—than; akarmaṇaḥ—without work; śarīra—bodily; yātrā—maintenance; api—even;
ca—also; te—your; na—never; prasiddhyet—effected; akarmaṇaḥ—without work.

TRANSLATION

Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man cannot
even maintain his physical body without work.

PURPORT

There are many pseudo-meditators who misrepresent themselves as belonging to
high parentage, and great professional men who falsely pose that they have
sacrificed everything for the sake of advancement in spiritual life. Lord Kṛṣṇa
did not want Arjuna to become a pretender, but that he perform his prescribed
duties as set forth for kṣatriyas. Arjuna was a householder and a military
