### 3.14


annād bhavanti bhūtāni

parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ

yajñād bhavati parjanyo

yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

annāt—from grains; bhavanti—grow; bhūtāni—the material bodies; parjanyāt—from
rains; anna—food grains; sambhavaḥ—are made possible; yajñāt—from the
performance of sacrifice; bhavati—becomes possible; parjanyaḥ—rains;
yajñaḥ—performance of yajña; karma—prescribed duties; samudbhavaḥ—born of.

TRANSLATION

All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rain. Rains
are produced by performance of yajña [sacrifice], and yajña is born of
prescribed duties.

PURPORT

Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gītā, writes as
follows: ye indrādy-aṅga-tayāvasthitaṁ yajñaṁ sarveśvaraṁ viṣṇum abhyarccya
taccheṣam aśnanti tena taddeha-yāntrāṁ sampādayanti te santaḥ sarveśvarasya
bhaktāḥ sarva-kilviṣair anādi-kāla-vivṛddhair ātmānubhava- pratibandhakair
nikhilaiḥ pāpair vimucyante. The Supreme Lord, who is known as the
yajña-puruṣaḥ, or the personal beneficiary of all sacrifices, is the master of
all demigods who serve Him as the different limbs of the body serve the whole.
Demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuṇa, etc., are appointed officers who manage
material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfy these demigods so
that they may be pleased to supply air, light and water sufficiently to produce
food grains. When Lord Kṛṣṇa is worshiped, the demigods, who are different limbs
of the Lord, are also automatically worshiped; therefore there is no separate
need to worship the demigods. For this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, offer food to Kṛṣṇa and then eat—a process which
nourishes the body spiritually. By such action not only are past sinful
reactions in the body vanquished, but the body becomes immunized to all
contamination of material nature. When there is an epidemic disease, an
antiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack of such an epidemic.
Similarly, food offered to Lord Viṣṇu and then taken by us makes us sufficiently
resistant to material affection, and one who is accustomed to this practice is
called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who
eats only food offered to Kṛṣṇa, can counteract all reactions of past material
infections, which are impediments to the progress of self-realization. On the
other hand, one who does not do so continues to increase the volume of sinful
action, and this prepares the next body to resemble hogs and dogs, to suffer the
resultant reactions of all sins. The material world is full of contaminations,
and one who is immunized by accepting prasādam of the Lord (food offered to
Viṣṇu) is saved from the attack, whereas one who does not do so becomes
subjected to contamination.

Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eats different
kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and the animals eat the refuse
of the food grains and vegetables, grass, plants, etc. Human beings who are
accustomed to eating meat and flesh must also depend on the production of
vegetation in order to eat the animals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to depend
on the production of the field and not on the production of big factories. The
field production is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such rains are
controlled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are all servants of
the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices; therefore, one who cannot
perform them will find himself in scarcity—that is the law of nature. Yajña,
specifically the saṅkīrtana-yajña prescribed for this age, must therefore be
performed to save us at least from scarcity of food supply.


### 3.15


karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi

brahmākṣara-samudbhavam

tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma

nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣṭhitam

karma—work; brahma—Vedas; udbhavam—produced from; viddhi—one should know;
brahma—the Vedas; akṣara—the Supreme Brahman (Personality of Godhead);
samudbhavam; directly manifested; tasmāt—therefore; sarva-gatam—all-pervading;
brahma—Transcendence; nityam—eternally; yajñe—in sacrifice;
pratiṣṭhitam—situated.

TRANSLATION

Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are directly
manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Consequently the
all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in acts of sacrifice.

PURPORT

Yajñārtha karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa only, is
more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for the satisfaction of
the yajña-puruṣa, Viṣṇu, then we must find out the direction of work in Brahman,
or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedas are therefore codes of working
directions. Anything performed without the direction of the Vedas is called
vikarma, or unauthorized or sinful work. Therefore, one should always take
direction from the Vedas to be saved from the reaction of work. As one has to
work in ordinary life by the direction of the state, similarly, one has to work
under direction of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in the Vedas
are directly manifested from the breathing of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is said: asya mahato bhūtasya naśvasitam etad yad ṛg-vedo
yajur-vedaḥ sāma-vedo ’tharvāṅ girasaḥ. “The four Vedas—namely the Ṛg-veda,
Yajur-veda, Sāma-veda and Atharva-veda—are all emanations from the breathing of
the great Personality of Godhead.” The Lord, being omnipotent, can speak by
breathing air, as it is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā, for the Lord has the
omnipotence to perform through each of His senses the actions of all other
senses. In other words, the Lord can speak through His breathing, and He can
impregnate by His eyes. In fact, it is said that He glanced over material nature
and thus fathered all living entities. After creating or impregnating the
conditioned souls into the womb of material nature, He gave His directions in
the Vedic wisdom as to how such conditioned souls can return home, back to
Godhead. We should always remember that the conditioned souls in material nature
are all eager for material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are so made that
one can satisfy one’s perverted desires, then return to Godhead, having finished
his so-called enjoyment. It is a chance for the conditioned souls to attain
liberation; therefore the conditioned souls must try to follow the process of
yajña by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. Even those who cannot follow the Vedic
injunctions may adopt the principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and that will take
the place of performance of Vedic yajñas, or karmas.

### 3.16


evaṁ pravartitaṁ cakraṁ

nānuvartayatīha yaḥ

aghāyur indriyārāmo

moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

evam—thus prescribed; pravartitam—established by the Vedas; cakram—cycle;
na—does not; anuvartayati—adopt; iha—in this life; yaḥ—one who; aghāyuḥ—life
full of sins; indriya-ārāmaḥ—satisfied in sense gratification; mogham—useless;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā (Arjuna); saḥ—one who does so; jīvati—lives.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, a man who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system of
sacrifice certainly leads a life of sin, for a person delighting only in the
senses lives in vain.

PURPORT

The mammonist philosophy of work very hard and enjoy sense gratification is
condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those who want to enjoy this
material world, the above-mentioned cycle of performing yajñas is absolutely
necessary. One who does not follow such regulations is living a very risky life,
being condemned more and more. By nature’s law, this human form of life is
specifically meant for self-realization, in either of the three ways—namely
karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of rigidly
following the performances of the prescribed yajñas for the transcendentalists
who are above vice and virtue; but those who are engaged in sense gratification
require purification by the above-mentioned cycle of yajña performances. There
are different kinds of activities. Those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious are
certainly engaged in sensory consciousness; therefore they need to execute pious
work. The yajña system is planned in such a way that sensory conscious persons
may satisfy their desires without becoming entangled in the reaction of
sense-gratificatory work. The prosperity of the world depends not on our own
efforts but on the background arrangement of the Supreme Lord, directly carried
out by the demigods. Therefore, the yajñas are directly aimed at the particular
demigod mentioned in the Vedas. Indirectly, it is the practice of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, because when one masters the performance of yajñas, one is sure
to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. But if by performing yajñas one does not become Kṛṣṇa
conscious, such principles are counted as only moral codes. One should not,
therefore, limit his progress only to the point of moral codes, but should
transcend them, to attain Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.17


yas tv ātma-ratir eva syād

ātma-tṛptaś ca mānavaḥ

ātmany eva ca santuṣṭas

tasya kāryaṁ na vidyate

yaḥ—one who; tu—but; ātma-ratiḥ—takes pleasure; eva—certainly; syāt—remains;
ātma-tṛptaḥ—self-illuminated; ca—and; mānavaḥ—a man; ātmani—in himself;
eva—only; ca—and; santuṣṭaḥ—perfectly satiated; tasya—his; kāryam—duty; na—does
not; vidyate—exist.

TRANSLATION

One who is, however, taking pleasure in the self, who is illumined in the self,
who rejoices in and is satisfied with the self only, fully satiated—for him
there is no duty.

PURPORT

A person who is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, and is fully satisfied by his acts in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due to his being Kṛṣṇa
conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, an effect of many, many
thousands of yajña performances. By such clearing of consciousness, one becomes
fully confident of his eternal position in relationship with the Supreme. His
duty thus becomes self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no
longer has any obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a Kṛṣṇa conscious
person is no longer interested in material activities and no longer takes
pleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similar infatuations.

### 3.18


naiva tasya kṛtenārtho

nākṛteneha kaścana

na cāsya sarva-bhūteṣu

kaścid artha-vyapāśrayaḥ

na—never; eva—certainly; tasya—his; kṛtena—by discharge of duty; arthaḥ—purpose;
na—nor; akṛtena—without discharge of duty; iha—in this world; kaścana—whatever;
na—never; ca—and; asya—of him; sarva-bhūteṣu —in all living beings; kaścit—any;
artha—purpose; vyapa-āśrayaḥ—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed
duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor has he any need to
depend on any other living being.

PURPORT

A self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed duty, save
and except activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not
inactivity either, as will be explained in the following verses. A Kṛṣṇa
conscious man does not take shelter of any person—man or demigod. Whatever he
does in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is sufficient in the discharge of his obligation.

### 3.19


tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ

kāryaṁ karma samācara

asakto hy ācaran karma

param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ

tasmāt—therefore; asaktaḥ—without attachment; satatam—constantly; kāryam—as
duty; karma—work; samācara—perform; asaktaḥ—nonattachment; hi—certainly;
ācaran—performing; karma—work; param—the Supreme; āpnoti—achieves; pūruṣaḥ—a
man.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as
a matter of duty; for by working without attachment, one attains the Supreme.

PURPORT

The Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and liberation for
the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting for Kṛṣṇa, or in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, under proper guidance and without attachment to the result of the
work, is certainly making progress toward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna is
told that he should fight in the Battle of Kurukṣetra for the interest of Kṛṣṇa
because Kṛṣṇa wanted him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a
personal attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act without
attachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highest degree,
recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Vedic rituals,
like prescribed sacrifices, are performed for purification of impious activities
that were performed in the field of sense gratification. But action in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is transcendental to the reactions of good or evil work. A Kṛṣṇa
conscious person has no attachment for the result but acts on behalf of Kṛṣṇa
alone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completely nonattached.

### 3.20


karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim

āsthitā janakādayaḥ

loka-saṅgraham evāpi

sampaśyan kartum arhasi

karmaṇā—by work; eva—even; hi—certainly; saṁsiddhim—perfection;
āsthitāḥ—situated; janaka-ādayaḥ—kings like Janaka and others;
loka-saṅgraham—educating the people in general; eva—also; api—for the sake of;
sampaśyan—by considering; kartum—to act; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

Even kings like Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by performance
of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in
general, you should perform your work.

PURPORT

Kings like Janaka and others were all self-realized souls; consequently they had
no obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas. Nonetheless they
performed all prescribed activities just to set examples for the people in
general. Janaka was the father of Sītā, and father-in-law of Lord Śrī Rāma.
Being a great devotee of the Lord, he was transcendentally situated, but because
he was the King of Mithila (a subdivision of Behar province in India), he had to
teach his subjects how to fight righteously in battle. He and his subjects
fought to teach people in general that violence is also necessary in a situation
where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of Kurukṣetra, every effort was
