made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the other
party was determined to fight. So for such a right cause, there is a necessity
for fighting. Although one who is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness may not have
any interest in the world, he still works to teach the public how to live and
how to act. Experienced persons in Kṛṣṇa consciousness can act in such a way
that others will follow, and this is explained in the following verse.

### 3.21


yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas

tat tad evetaro janaḥ

sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute

lokas tad anuvartate

yat—whatever; yat—and whichever; ācarati—does he act; śreṣṭhaḥ—respectable
leader; tat—that; tat—and that alone; eva—certainly; itaraḥ—common;
janaḥ—person; saḥ—he; yat—whichever; pramāṇam—evidence; kurute—does perform;
lokaḥ—all the world; tat—that; anuvartate—follow in the footsteps.

TRANSLATION

Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his footsteps.
And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.

PURPORT

People in general always require a leader who can teach the public by practical
behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking if he himself smokes.
Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behave properly even before he begins
teaching. One who teaches in that way is called ācārya, or the ideal teacher.
Therefore, a teacher must follow the principles of śāśtra (scripture) to reach
the common man. The teacher cannot manufacture rules against the principles of
revealed scriptures. The revealed scriptures, like Manu-saṁhitā and similar
others, are considered the standard books to be followed by human society. Thus
the leader’s teaching should be based on the principles of the standard rules as
they are practiced by the great teachers. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also affirms
that one should follow in the footsteps of great devotees, and that is the way
of progress on the path of spiritual realization. The king or the executive head
of a state, the father and the school teacher are all considered to be natural
leaders of the innocent people in general. All such natural leaders have a great
responsibility to their dependants; therefore they must be conversant with
standard books of moral and spiritual codes.

### 3.22


na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ

triṣu lokeṣu kiñcana

nānavāptam avāptavyaṁ

varta eva ca karmaṇi

na—none; me—Mine; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; asti—there is; kartavyam—any prescribed
duty; triṣu—in the three; lokeṣu—planetary systems; kiñcana—anything; na—no;
anavāptam—in want; avāptavyam—to be gained; varte—engaged; eva—certainly;
ca—also; karmaṇi—in one’s prescribed duty.

TRANSLATION

O son of Pṛthā, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I need to obtain
anything—and yet I am engaged in work.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic literatures as
follows:

tam īśvarāṇāṁ paramaṁ maheśvaraṁ taṁ devatānāṁ paramaṁ ca daivatam patiṁ patīnāṁ
paramaṁ parastād vidāma devaṁ bhuvaneśam īḍyam

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate parāsya
śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svā-bhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca.

“The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is the
greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is under His control.
All entities are delegated with particular power only by the Supreme Lord; they
are not supreme themselves. He is also worshipable by all demigods and is the
supreme director of all directors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds
of material leaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no one
greater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.

“He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary living entity. There
is no difference between His body and His soul. He is absolute. All His senses
are transcendental. Any one of His senses can perform the action of any other
sense. Therefore, no one is greater than Him or equal to Him. His potencies are
multifarious, and thus His deeds are automatically performed as a natural
sequence.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.7–8)

Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead and is
existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to perform. One who must receive the results of work has some designated duty,
but one who has nothing to achieve within the three planetary systems certainly
has no duty. And yet Lord Kṛṣṇa is engaged on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra as
the leader of the kṣatriyas because the kṣatriyas are duty-bound to give
protection to the distressed. Although He is above all the regulations of the
revealed scriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealed
scriptures.

### 3.23


yadi hy ahaṁ na varteyaṁ

jātu karmaṇy atandritaḥ

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ

yadi—if; hi—certainly; aham—I; na—do not; varteyam—thus engage; jātu—ever;
karmaṇi—in the performance of prescribed duties; atandritaḥ—with great care;
mama—My; vartma—path; anuvartante—would follow; manuṣyāḥ—all men; pārtha—O son
of Pṛthā; sarvaśaḥ—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

For, if I did not engage in work, O Pārtha, certainly all men would follow My
path.

PURPORT

In order to keep the balance of social tranquility for progress in spiritual
life. there are traditional family usages meant for every civilized man.
Although such rules and regulations are for the conditioned souls and not Lord
Kṛṣṇa, because He descended to establish the principles of religion, He followed
the prescribed rules. Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps
because He is the greatest authority. From the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is
understood that Lord Kṛṣṇa was performing all the religious duties at home and
out of home, as required of a householder.

### 3.24


utsīdeyur ime lokā

na kuryāṁ karma ced aham

saṅkarasya ca kartā syām

upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ

utsīdeyuḥ—put into ruin; ime—all these; lokāḥ—worlds; na—do not; kuryām—perform;
karma—prescribed duties; cet—if; aham—I; saṅkarasya—of unwanted population;
ca—and; kartā—creator; syām—shall be; upahanyām—destroy; imāḥ—all these;
prajāḥ—living entities.

TRANSLATION

If I should cease to work, then all these worlds would be put to ruination. I
would also be the cause of creating unwanted population, and I would thereby
destroy the peace of all sentient beings.

PURPORT

Varṇa-saṅkara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the general
society. In order to check this social disturbance, there are prescribed rules
and regulations by which the population can automatically become peaceful and
organized for spiritual progress in life. When Lord Kṛṣṇa descends, naturally He
deals with such rules and regulations in order to maintain the prestige and
necessity of such important performances. The Lord is the father of all living
entities, and if the living entities are misguided, indirectly the
responsibility goes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is general disregard
of regulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and corrects the society. We
should, however, note carefully that although we have to follow in the footsteps
of the Lord, we still have to remember that we cannot imitate Him. Following and
imitating are not on the same level. We cannot imitate the Lord by lifting
Govardhana Hill, as the Lord did in His childhood. It is impossible for any
human being. We have to follow His instructions, but we may not imitate Him at
any time. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam affirms:

naitat samācarej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād yathā
’rudro ’bdhijaṁ viṣam

īśvarāṇāṁ vacaḥ satyaṁ tathaivācaritaṁ kvacit teṣāṁ yat sva-vaco yuktaṁ
buddhimāṁs tat samācaret

“One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His empowered
servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and any intelligent person
will perform them as instructed. However, one should guard against trying to
imitate their actions. One should not try to drink the ocean of poison in
imitation of Lord Śiva.” (Bhāg. 10.33.30)

We should always consider the position of the īśvaras, or those who can actually
control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior. Without such power, one
cannot imitate the īśvaras, who are superpowerful. Lord Śiva drank poison to the
extent of swallowing an ocean, but if any common man tries to drink even a
fragment of such poison, he will be killed. There are many psuedo-devotees of
Lord Śiva who want to indulge in smoking gāñjā (marijuana) and similar
intoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the acts of Lord Śiva they
are calling death very near. Similarly, there are some psuedo-devotees of Lord
Kṛṣṇa who prefer to imitate the Lord in His rāsa-līlā, or dance of love,
forgetting their inability to lift Govardhana Hill. It is best, therefore, that
one not try to imitate the powerful, but simply follow their instructions; nor
should one try to occupy their posts without qualification. There are so many
“incarnations” of God without the power of the Supreme Godhead.

### 3.25


saktāḥ karmaṇy avidvāṁso

yathā kurvanti bhārata

kuryād vidvāṁs tathāsaktaś

cikīrṣur loka-saṅgraham

saktāḥ—being attached; karmaṇi—prescribed duties; avidvāṁsaḥ—the ignorant;
yathā—as much as; kurvanti—do it; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata; kuryāt—must
do; vidvān—the learned; tathā—thus; asaktaḥ—without attachment;
cikīrṣuḥ—desiring to; loka-saṅgraham—leading the people in general.

TRANSLATION

As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results, similarly the
learned may also act, but without attachment, for the sake of leading people on
the right path.

PURPORT

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and a person not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are
differentiated by different desires. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not do
anything which is not conducive to development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He may
even act exactly like the ignorant person, who is too much attached to material
activities, but one is engaged in such activities for the satisfaction of his
sense gratification, whereas the other is engaged for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, the Kṛṣṇa conscious person is required to show the people how to act
and how to engage the results of action for the purpose of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.26


na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed

ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām

joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi

vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran

na—do not; buddhi-bhedam—disrupt the intelligence; janayet—do; ajñānām—of the
foolish; karma-saṅginām—attached to fruitive work; joṣayet—dovetailed;
sarva—all; karmāṇi—work; vidvān—learned; yuktaḥ—all engaged;
samācaran—practicing.

TRANSLATION

Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to fruitive
action. They should not be encouraged to refrain from work, but to engage in
work in the spirit of devotion.

PURPORT

Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: that is the end of all Vedic rituals. All
rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everything that is put into the
Vedas, including all directions for material activities, are meant for
understanding Kṛṣṇa, who is the ultimate goal of life. But because the
conditioned souls do not know anything beyond sense gratification, they study
the Vedas to that end. Through sense regulations, however, one is gradually
elevated to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore a realized soul in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness should not disturb others in their activities or understanding,
but he should act by showing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the
service of Kṛṣṇa. The learned Kṛṣṇa conscious person may act in such a way that
the ignorant person working for sense gratification may learn how to act and how
to behave. Although the ignorant man is not to be disturbed in his activities,
still, a slightly developed Kṛṣṇa conscious person may directly be engaged in
the service of the Lord without waiting for other Vedic formulas. For this
fortunate man there is no need to follow the Vedic rituals, because in direct
Kṛṣṇa consciousness one can have all the results simply by following the
prescribed duties of a particular person.

### 3.27


prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

prakṛteḥ—of material nature; kriyamāṇāni—all being done; guṇaiḥ—by the modes;
karmāṇi—activities; sarvaśaḥ—all kinds of; ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha—bewildered by false
ego; ātmā—the spirit soul; kartā—doer; aham—I; iti—thus; manyate—thinks.

TRANSLATION

The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality
carried out by nature.