PURPORT

Two persons, one in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and the other in material consciousness,
working on the same level, may appear to be working on the same platform, but
there is a wide gulf of difference in their respective positions. The person in
material consciousness is convinced by false ego that he is the doer of
everything. He does not know that the mechanism of the body is produced by
material nature, which works under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. The
materialistic person has no knowledge that ultimately he is under the control of
Kṛṣṇa. The person in false ego takes all credit for doing everything
independantly, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does not know that
this gross and subtle body is the creation of material nature, under the order
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as such his bodily and mental
activities should be engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
The ignorant man forgets that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as
Hṛṣīkeśa, or the master of the senses of the material body, for due to his long
misuse of the senses in sense gratification, he is factually bewildered by the
false ego, which makes him forget his eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

### 3.28


tattva-vit tu mahā-bāho

guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ

guṇā guṇeṣu vartanta

iti matvā na sajjate

tattvavit—the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu—but; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed
one; guṇa-karma—works under material influence; vibhāgayoḥ—differences;
guṇāḥ—senses; guṇeṣu—in sense gratification; vartante—being engaged; iti—thus;
matvā—thinking; na—never; sajjate—becomes attached.

TRANSLATION

One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not engage
himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the differences
between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.

PURPORT

The knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position in
material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and that his position should not be in the
material creation. He knows his real identity as part and parcel of the Supreme,
who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and he realizes that somehow or other he is
entrapped in the material conception of life. In his pure state of existence he
is meant to dovetail his activities in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. He therefore engages himself in the activities of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and becomes naturally unattached to the activities of the
material senses, which are all circumstantial and temporary. He knows that his
material condition of life is under the supreme control of the Lord;
consequently he is not disturbed by all kinds of material reactions, which he
considers to be the mercy of the Lord. According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, one who
knows the Absolute Truth in three different features—namely Brahman, Paramātmā,
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead—is called tattvavit, for he knows also
his own factual position in relationship with the Supreme.

### 3.29


prakṛter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ

sajjante guṇa-karmasu

tān akṛtsna-vido mandān

kṛtsna-vin na vicālayet

prakṛteḥ—impelled by the material modes; guṇa-saṁmūḍhāḥ—befooled by material
identification; sajjante—become engaged; guṇa-karmasu—in material activities;
tān—all those; akṛtsna-vidaḥ—persons with a poor fund of knowledge; mandān—lazy
to understand self-realization; kṛtsna-vit—one who is in factual knowledge;
na—may not; vicālayet—try to agitate.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage themselves
in material activities and become attached. But the wise should not unsettle
them, although these duties are inferior due to the performers’ lack of
knowledge.

PURPORT

Persons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is a gift of the
material nature, and one who is too much attached to the bodily consciousness is
called mandān, or a lazy person without understanding of spirit soul. Ignorant
men think of the body as the self; bodily connections with others are accepted
as kinsmanship; the land in which the body is obtained is the object of worship;
and the formalities of religious rituals are considered ends in themselves.
Social work, nationalism, and altruism are some of the activities for such
materially designated persons. Under the spell of such designations, they are
always busy in the material field; for them spiritual realization is a myth, and
so they are not interested. Such bewildered persons may even be engaged in such
primary moral principles of life as nonviolence and similar materially
benevolent work. Those who are, however, enlightened in spiritual life, should
not try to agitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to prosecute one’s
own spiritual activities silently.

Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and
therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa advises us not to disturb them and simply waste valuable
time. But the devotees of the Lord are more kind than the Lord because they
understand the purpose of the Lord. Consequently they undertake all kinds of
risks, even to the point of approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in
the acts of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human
being.


### 3.30


mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi

sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā

nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā

yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ

mayi—unto Me; sarvāṇi—all sorts of; karmāṇi—activities; sannyasya—giving up
completely; adhyātma—with full knowledge of the self; cetasā—consciousness;
nirāśīḥ—without desire for profit; nirmamaḥ—without ownership; bhūtvā—so being;
yudhyasva—fight; vigata-jvaraḥ—without being lethargic.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with mind intent on
Me, and without desire for gain and free from egoism and lethargy, fight.

PURPORT

This verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gītā. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious to discharge duties, as
if in military discipline. Such an injunction may make things a little
difficult; nevertheless duties must be carried out, with dependence on Kṛṣṇa,
because that is the constitutional position of the living entity. The living
entity cannot be happy independant of the cooperation of the Supreme Lord
because the eternal constitutional position of the living entity is to become
subordinate to the desires of the Lord. Arjuna was, therefore, ordered by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to fight as if the Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice
everything for the good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time discharge
prescribed duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not have to
consider the order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order. The Supreme
Lord is the Soul of all souls; therefore, one who depends solely and wholly on
the Supreme Soul without personal consideration, or in other words, one who is
fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, is called adhyātma-cetasā. Nirāśīḥ means that one has to
act on the order of the master. Nor should one ever expect fruitive results. The
cashier may count millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim a
cent for himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in the world
belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs to the Supreme
Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or unto Me. And when one acts in such
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, certainly he does not claim proprietorship over anything.
This consciousness is called nirmama, or nothing is mine. And, if there is any
reluctance to execute such a stern order which is without consideration of
so-called kinsmen in the bodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown
off; in this way one may become vigata-jvara, or without feverish mentality or
lethargy. Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular type
of work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of liberation.

### 3.31


ye me matam idaṁ nityam

anutiṣṭhanti mānavāḥ

śraddhāvanto ’nasūyanto

mucyante te ’pi karmabhiḥ

ye—those; me—My; matam—injunctions; idam—this; nityam—eternal function;
anutiṣṭhanti—execute regularly; mānavāḥ—humankind; śraddhāvantaḥ—with faith and
devotion; anasūyantaḥ—without envy; mucyante—become free; te—all of them;
api—even; karmabhiḥ—from the bondage of the law of fruitive action.

TRANSLATION

One who executes his duties according to My injunctions and who follows this
teaching faithfully, without envy, becomes free from the bondage of fruitive
actions.

PURPORT

The injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the essence of
all Vedic wisdom, and therefore is eternally true without exception. As the
Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is also eternal. One
should have firm faith in this injunction, without envying the Lord. There are
many philosophers who write comments on the Bhagavad-gītā but have no faith in
Kṛṣṇa. They will never be liberated from the bondage of fruitive action. But an
ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord, even though
unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from the bondage of the law of
karma. In the beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one may not fully discharge the
injunctions of the Lord, but because one is not resentful of this principle and
works sincerely without consideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely
be promoted to the stage of pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.32


ye tv etad abhyasūyanto

nānutiṣṭhanti me matam

sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs tān

viddhi naṣṭān acetasaḥ

ye—those; tu—however; etat—this; abhyasūyantaḥ—out of envy; na—do not;
anutiṣṭhanti—regularly perform; me—My; matam—injunction; sarva-jñāna—all sorts
of knowledge; vimūḍhān—perfectly befooled; tān—they are; viddhi—know it well;
naṣṭān—all ruined; acetasaḥ—without Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

TRANSLATION

But those who, out of envy, disregard these teachings and do not practice them
regularly, are to be considered bereft of all knowledge, befooled, and doomed to
ignorance and bondage.

PURPORT

The flaw of not being Kṛṣṇa conscious is clearly stated herein. As there is
punishment for disobedience to the order of the supreme executive head, so there
is certainly punishment for the disobedience of the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. A disobedient person, however great he may be, is
ignorant of his own self, of the Supreme Brahman, and Paramātmā and the
Personality of Godhead, due to a vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of
perfection of life for him.

### 3.33


sadṛśaṁ ceṣṭate svasyāḥ

prakṛter jñānavān api

prakṛtiṁ yānti bhūtāni

nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣyati

sadṛśam—accordingly; ceṣṭate—tries; svasyāḥ—in one’s own nature; prakṛteḥ—modes;
jñānavān—the learned; api—although; prakṛtim—nature; yānti—undergo; bhūtāni—all
living entities; nigrahaḥ—suppression; kim—what; kariṣyati—can do.

TRANSLATION

Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone follows
his nature. What can repression accomplish?

PURPORT

Unless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he
cannot get free from the influence of the modes of material nature, as it is
confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter (7.14). Therefore, even for the
most highly educated person on the mundane plane, it is impossible to get out of
the entanglement of māyā simply by theoretical knowledge, or by separating the
soul from the body. There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose to
be advanced in the science, but inwardly or privately are completely under the
particular modes of nature which they are unable to surpass. Academically, one
may be very learned, but because of his long association with material nature,
he is in bondage. Kṛṣṇa consciousness helps one to get out of the material
entanglement, even though one may be engaged in his prescribed duties.
Therefore, without being fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, no one should suddenly
give up his prescribed duties and become a so-called yogī or transcendentalist
artificially. It is better to be situated in one’s position and to try to attain
Kṛṣṇa consciousness under superior training. Thus one may be freed from the
clutches of māyā.

### 3.34


indriyasyendriyasyārthe

rāga-dveṣau vyavasthitau

tayor na vaśam āgacchet

tau hy asya paripanthinau

indriyasya—of the senses; indriyasya arthe—in the sense objects;
rāga—attachment; dveṣau—also in detachment; vyavasthitau—put under regulations;
tayoḥ—of them; na—never; vaśam—control; āgacchet—one should come; tau—those;
hi—certainly are; asya—his; paripanthinau—stumbling blocks.

TRANSLATION

Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings, but one
should not fall under the control of senses and sense objects because they are
stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.
