PURPORT

Those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage in
material sense gratifications. But those who are not in such consciousness
should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures. Unrestricted
sense enjoyment is the cause of material encagement, but one who follows the
rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures does not become entangled by
the sense objects. For example, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned
soul, and sex enjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage ties. For
example, according to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sex
relationships with any women other than one’s wife. All other women are to be
considered as one’s mother. But, in spite of such injunctions, a man is still
inclined to have sex relationships with other women. These propensities are to
be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blocks on the path of
self-realization. As long as the material body is there, the necessities of the
material body are allowed, but under rules and regulations. And yet, we should
not rely upon the control of such allowances. One has to follow those rules and
regulations, unattached to them, because practice of sense gratifications under
regulations may also lead one to go astray—as much as there is always the chance
of an accident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very carefully
maintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even on the safest
road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a very long, long time, owing
to material association. Therefore, in spite of regulated sense enjoyment, there
is every chance of falling down; therefore any attachment for regulated sense
enjoyment must also be avoided by all means. But action in the loving service of
Kṛṣṇa detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no one
should try to be detached from Kṛṣṇa consciousness at any stage of life. The
whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense attachment is ultimately to
become situated on the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.35


śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ

para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt

sva-dharme nidhanaṁ śreyaḥ

para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

śreyān—far better; sva-dharmaḥ—one’s prescribed duties; viguṇaḥ—even faulty;
para-dharmāt—from duties mentioned for others; svanuṣthitāt—than perfectly done;
sva-dharme—in one’s prescribed duties; nidhanam—destruction; śreyaḥ—better;
para-dharmaḥ—duties prescribed for others; bhaya-āvahaḥ—dangerous.

TRANSLATION

It is far better to discharge one’s prescribed duties, even though they may be
faulty, than another’s duties. Destruction in the course of performing one’s own
duty is better than engaging in another’s duties, for to follow another’s path
is dangerous.

PURPORT

One should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness
rather than those prescribed for others. Prescribed duties complement one’s
psychophysical condition, under the spell of the modes of material nature.
Spiritual duties are as ordered by the spiritual master, for the transcendental
service of Kṛṣṇa. But both materially or spiritually, one should stick to his
prescribed duties even up to death, rather than imitate another’s prescribed
duties. Duties on the spiritual platform and duties on the material platform may
be different, but the principle of following the authorized direction is always
good for the performer. When one is under the spell of the modes of material
nature, one should follow the prescribed rules for particular situations and
should not imitate others. For example, a brāhmaṇa, who is in the mode of
goodness, is nonviolent, whereas a kṣatriya, who is in the mode of passion, is
allowed to be violent. As such, for a kṣatriya it is better to be vanquished
following the rules of violence than to imitate a brāhmaṇa who follows the
principles of nonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual
process, not abruptly. However, when one transcends the modes of material nature
and is fully situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can perform anything and
everything under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master. In that
complete stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the kṣatriya may act as a brāhmaṇa, or a
brāhmaṇa may act as a kṣatriya. In the transcendental stage, the distinctions of
the material world do not apply. For example, Viśvāmitra was originally a
kṣatriya, but later on he acted as a brāhmaṇa, whereas Paraśurāma was a
brāhmaṇa, but later on he acted as a kṣatriya. Being transcendentally situated,
they could do so; but as long as one is on the material platform, he must
perform his duties according to the modes of material nature. At the same time,
he must have a full sense of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

### 3.36


arjuna uvāca

atha kena prayukto ’yaṁ

pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ

anicchann api vārṣṇeya

balād iva niyojitaḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; atha—hereafter; kena—by what; prayuktaḥ—impelled;
ayam—one; pāpam—sins; carati—acts; pūruṣaḥ—a man; anicchan—without desiring;
api—although; vārṣṇeya—O descendant of Vṛṣṇi; balāt—by force; iva—as if;
niyojitaḥ—engaged.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O descendant of Vṛṣṇi, by what is one impelled to sinful acts, even
unwillingly, as if engaged by force?

PURPORT

A living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally spiritual,
pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore, by nature he is not
subjected to the sins of the material world. But when he is in contact with the
material nature, he acts in many sinful ways without hesitation, and sometimes
even against his will. As such, Arjuna’s question to Kṛṣṇa is very sanguine, as
to the perverted nature of the living entities. Although the living entity
sometimes does not want to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions
are not, however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to another
cause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.

### 3.37


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

kāma eṣa krodha eṣa

rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ

mahāśano mahā-pāpmā

viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Personality of Godhead said; kāmaḥ—lust; eṣaḥ—all these;
krodhaḥ—wrath; eṣaḥ—all these; rajo-guṇa—the mode of passion; samudbhavaḥ—born
of; mahā-śanaḥ—all-devouring; mahā-pāpmā—greatly sinful; viddhi—know; enam—this;
iha—in the material world; vairiṇam—greatest enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with
the material modes of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the
all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world.

PURPORT

When a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his eternal
love for Kṛṣṇa is transformed into lust, in association with the mode of
passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of God becomes transformed into
lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind is transformed into yogurt. Then
again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turns into wrath; wrath is transformed into
illusion, and illusion continues the material existence. Therefore, lust is the
greatest enemy of the living entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure
living entity to remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the
manifestation of the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as wrath
and other corollaries. If, therefore, the modes of passion, instead of being
degraded into the modes of ignorance, are elevated to the modes of goodness by
the prescribed method of Iiving and acting, then one can be saved from the
degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for His
ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts and parcels
of this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence, but by misuse of
their independence, when the service attitude is transformed into the propensity
for sense enjoyment, they come under the sway of lust. This material creation is
created by the Lord to give a facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these
lustful propensities, and when they are completely baffled by prolonged lustful
activities, the living entities begin to inquire about their real position.

This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedānta-sūtras, wherein it is said, athāto
brahma-jijñāsā: one should inquire into the Supreme. And the Supreme is defined
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as janmādyasya yato ’nvayād itarataś ca, or, “The origin of
everything is the Supreme Brahman.” Therefore, the origin of lust is also in the
Supreme. If, therefore, lust is transformed into love for the Supreme, or
transformed into Kṛṣṇa consciousness—or, in other words, desiring everything for
Kṛṣṇa—then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized. Hanumān, the great servitor
of Lord Rama, engaged his wrath upon his enemies for the satisfaction of the
Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath, when they are employed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
become our friends instead of our enemies.

### 3.38


dhūmenāvriyate vahnir

yathādarśo malena ca

yatholbenāvṛto garbhas

tathā tenedam āvṛtam

dhūmena—by smoke; āvriyate—covered; vahniḥ—fire; yathā—just as; ādarśaḥ—mirror;
malena—by dust; ca—also; yathā—just as; ulbena—by the womb; āvṛtaḥ—is covered;
garbhaḥ—embryo; tathā—so; tena—by that lust; idam—this; āvṛtam—is covered.

TRANSLATION

As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the embryo is
covered by the womb, similarly, the living entity is covered by different
degrees of this lust.

PURPORT

There are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his pure
consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust under different
manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror, and the womb about
the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it is understood that the fire of
the living spark can be a little perceived. In other words, when the living
entity exhibits his Kṛṣṇa consciousness slightly, he may be likened to the fire
covered by smoke. Although fire is necessary where there is smoke, there is no
overt manifestation of fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning
of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process of
the mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process is to
chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb is an analogy
illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the womb is so helpless that
he cannot even move. This stage of living condition can be compared to that of
the trees. The trees are also living entities, but they have been put in such a
condition of life by such a great exhibition of lust that they are almost void
of all consciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and beasts,
and the smoke covered fire is compared to the human being. In the form of a
human being, the living entity may revive a little Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and, if
he makes further development, the fire of spiritual life can be kindled in the
human form of life. By careful handling of the smoke in the fire, the fire can
be made to blaze. Therefore the human form of life is a chance for the living
entity to escape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form of
life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness
under able guidance.

### 3.39


āvṛtaṁ jñānam etena

jñānino nitya-vairiṇā

kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya

duṣpūreṇānalena ca

āvṛtam—covered; jñānam—pure consciousness; etena—by this; jñāninaḥ—of the
knower; nitya-vairiṇā—eternal enemy; kāma-rūpeṇa—in the form of lust; kaunteya—O
son of Kuntī; duṣpūreṇa—never to be satisfied; analena—by the fire; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Thus, a man’s pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the form of
lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.

PURPORT

It is said in the Manu-smṛti that lust cannot be satisfied by any amount of
sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by a constant supply of
fuel. In the material world, the center of all activities is sex, and thus this
material world is called maithuṇya-āgāra, or the shackles of sex life. In the
ordinary prison house, criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals
who are disobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life.
Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sense gratification means
increasing the duration of the material existence of a living entity. Therefore,
this lust is the symbol of ignorance by which the living entity is kept within
the material world. While one enjoys sense gratification, it may be that there
is some feeling of happiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness
is the ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.

### 3.40


indriyāṇi mano buddhir

asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate

etair vimohayaty eṣa

jñānam āvṛtya dehinam

indriyāṇi—the senses; manaḥ—the mind; buddhiḥ—the intelligence; asya—of the
lust; adhiṣṭhānam—sitting place; ucyate—called; etaiḥ—by all these;
vimohayati—bewilders; eṣaḥ—of this; jñānam—knowledge; āvṛtya—covering;
dehinam—the embodied.

TRANSLATION

The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust,
which veils the real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders him.

PURPORT

The enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa is giving hints of those places, so
that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where he can be found. Mind is
the center of all the activities of the senses, and thus the mind is the
reservoir of all ideas of sense gratification; and, as a result, the mind and
the senses become the repositories of lust. Next, the intelligence department
becomes the capital of such lustful propensities. Intelligence is the immediate
next-door neighbor of the spirit soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit
soul to acquire the false ego and identify itself with matter, and thus with the
mind and senses. The spirit soul becomes addicted to enjoying the material
senses and mistakes this as true happiness. This false identification of the
spirit soul is very nicely explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇāpe tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma idyadhīḥ
yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salite na karhicij janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva gokharaḥ.
