
“A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his self,
who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who considers the
land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the place of pilgrimage simply to
take a bath rather than meet men of transcendental knowledge there, is to be
considered as an ass or a cow.”

### 3.41


tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau

niyamya bharatarṣabha

pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ

jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam

tasmāt—therefore; tvam—you; indriyāṇi—senses; ādau—in the beginning; niyamya—by
regulating; bharatarṣabha—O chief amongst the descendants of Bharata;
pāpmānam—the great symbol of sin; prajahi—curb; hi—certainly; enam—this;
jñāna—knowledge; vijñāna—scientific knowledge of the pure soul;
nāśanam—destroyer.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bhāratas, in the very beginning curb this great
symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of
knowledge and self-realization.

PURPORT

The Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning so that
he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroys the urge for
self-realization, and specifically, knowledge of the self. Jñānam refers to
knowledge of self as distinguished from non-self, or, in other words, knowledge
that the spirit soul is not the body. Vijñānam refers to specific knowledge of
the spirit soul and knowledge of one’s constitutional position and his
relationship to the Supreme Soul. It is explained thus in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:
jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me yad-vijñāna-samanvitam / sarahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca gṛhāna
gaditaṁ mayā: “The knowledge of the self and the Supreme Self is very
confidential and mysterious, being veiled by māyā, but such knowledge and
specific realization can be understood if it is explained by the Lord Himself.”
Bhagavad-gītā gives us that knowledge, specifically knowledge of the self. The
living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, and therefore they are simply
meant to serve the Lord. This consciousness is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So,
from the very beginning of life one has to learn this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and
thereby one may become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious and act accordingly.

Lust is only the perverted reflection of the love of God which is natural for
every living entity. But if one is educated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness from the very
beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorate into lust. When love of
God deteriorates into lust, it is very difficult to return to the normal
condition. Nonetheless, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so powerful that even a late
beginner can become a lover of God by following the regulative principles of
devotional service. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of
understanding its urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust into love of
Godhead—the highest perfectional stage of human life.

### 3.42


indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur

indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ

manasas tu parā buddhir

yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ

indriyāṇī—senses; parāṇi—superior; āhuḥ—is said; indriyebhyaḥ—more than the
senses; param—superior; manaḥ—the mind; manasaḥ—more than the mind; tu—also;
parā—superior; buddhiḥ—intelligence; yaḥ—one which; buddheḥ—more than the
intelligence; parataḥ—superior; tu—but; saḥ—he.

TRANSLATION

The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the senses;
intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul] is even higher
than the intelligence.

PURPORT

The senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is reserved
within the body, but it is given vent through the senses. Therefore, the senses
are superior to the body as a whole. These outlets are not in use when there is
superior consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In Kṛṣṇa consciousness the soul
makes direct connection with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the
bodily functions, as described here, ultimately end in the Supreme Soul. Bodily
action means the functions of the senses, and stopping the senses means stopping
all bodily actions. But since the mind is active, then, even though the body may
be silent and at rest, the mind will act—as it does during dreaming. But, above
the mind there is the determination of the intelligence, and above the
intelligence is the soul proper. If, therefore, the soul is directly engaged
with the Supreme, naturally all other subordinates, namely, the intelligence,
mind and the senses, will be automatically engaged. In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad there
is a passage in which it is said that the objects of sense gratification are
superior to the senses, and mind is superior to the sense objects. If,
therefore, the mind is directly engaged in the service of the Lord constantly,
then there is no chance of the senses becoming engaged in other ways. This
mental attitude has already been explained. If the mind is engaged in the
transcendental service of the Lord, there is no chance of its being engaged in
the lower propensities. In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad the soul has been described as
mahān, the great. Therefore the soul is above all—namely, the sense objects, the
senses, the mind and the intelligence. Therefore, directly understanding the
constitutional position of the soul is the solution of the whole problem.

With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position of the soul
and then engage the mind always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That solves the whole
problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advised to keep aloof from the
objects of senses. One has to strengthen the mind by use of intelligence. If by
intelligence one engages one’s mind in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by complete
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then, automatically, the mind
becomes stronger, and even though the senses are very strong, like serpents,
they will be no more effective than serpents with broken fangs. But even though
the soul is the master of intelligence and mind, and the senses also, still,
unless it is strengthened by association with Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
there is every chance of falling down due to the agitated mind.

### 3.43


evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā

saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā

jahi śatruṁ mahā-bāho

kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam

evam—thus; buddheḥ—of intelligence; param—superior; buddhvā—so knowing;
saṁstabhya—by steadying; ātmānam—the mind; ātmanā—by deliberate intelligence;
jahi—conquer; śatrum—the enemy; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; kāma-rūpam—the
form of lust; durāsadam—formidable.

TRANSLATION

Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and
intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self and thus—by
spiritual strength—conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust.

PURPORT

This Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā is conclusively directive to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidness as the ultimate
end. In the material existence of life, one is certainly influenced by
propensities for lust and desire for dominating the resources of material
nature. Desire for overlording and sense gratification are the greatest enemies
of the conditioned soul; but by the strength of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can
control the material senses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give up
work and prescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position without being
influenced by the material senses and the mind—by steady intelligence directed
toward one’s pure identity. This is the sum total of this chapter. In the
immature stage of material existence, philosophical speculations and artificial
attempts to control the senses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can
never help a man toward spiritual life. He must be trained in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness by higher intelligence.


Transcendental Knowledge

### 4.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave ’bravīt

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam—this;
vivasvate—unto the sun-god; yogam—the science of one’s relationship to the
Supreme; proktavān—instructed; aham—I; avyayam—imperishable; vivasvān—Vivasvān
(the sun-god’s name); manave—unto the father of mankind (of the name
Vaivasvata); prāha—told; manuḥ—the father of mankind; ikṣvākave—unto King
Ikṣvāku; abravīt—said.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the
sun-god, Vivasvān, and Vivasvān instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind,
and Manu in turn instructed it to Ikṣvāku.

PURPORT

Herein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gītā traced from a remote time when
it was delivered to the royal order, the kings of all planets. This science is
especially meant for the protection of the inhabitants and therefore the royal
order should understand it in order to be able to rule the citizens and protect
them from the material bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge, in eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and the executive heads of all states and all planets are obliged to
impart this lesson to the citizens by education, culture and devotion. In other
words, the executive heads of all states are intended to spread the science of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that the people may take advantage of this great science
and pursue a successful path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of
life.

In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvān, the king of the sun, which
is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In the Brahma-saṁhitā [Bs.
5.52] it is stated:

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrttir aśeṣa-tejāḥ
yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kālacakro govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

“Let me worship,” Lord Brahmā said, “the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda
[Kṛṣṇa], who is the original person and under whose order the sun, which is the
king of all planets, is assuming immense power and heat. The sun represents the
eye of the Lord and traverses its orbit in obedience to His order.”

The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of the name
Vivasvān) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all other planets by
supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order of Kṛṣṇa, and Lord
Kṛṣṇa originally made Vivasvān His first disciple to understand the science of
Bhagavad-gītā. The Gītā is not, therefore, a speculative treatise for the
insignificant mundane scholar but is a standard book of knowledge coming down
from time immemorial. In the Mahābhārata (Śānti-parva 348.51–52) we can trace
out the history of the Gītā as follows:

tretā-yugādau ca tato vivasvān manave dadau manuś ca loka-bhṛty-arthaṁ
sutāyekṣvākave dadau ikṣvākuṇā ca kathito vyāpya lokān avasthitāḥ

“In the beginning of the Tretā-yuga [millennium] this science of the
relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvān to Manu. Manu, being the
father of mankind, gave it to his son Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, the King of this earth
planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty in which Lord Rāmacandra appeared.
Therefore, Bhagavad-gītā existed in the human society from the time of Mahārāja
Ikṣvāku.”

At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand years of the
Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was Dvāpara-yuga
(800,000 years), and before that there was Tretā-yuga (1,200,000 years). Thus,
some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke the Bhagavad-gītā to his disciple and son
Mahārāja lkṣvāku, the King of this planet earth. The age of the current Manu is
calculated to last some 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed.
Accepting that before the birth of Manu, the Gītā was spoken by the Lord to His
disciple, the sun-god Vivasvān, a rough estimate is that the Gītā was spoken at
least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has been extant for two
million years. It was respoken by the Lord again to Arjuna about five thousand
years ago. That is the rough estimate of the history of the Gīta, according to
the Gītā itself and according to the version of the speaker, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It
was spoken to the sun-god Vivasvān because he is also a kṣatriya and is the
father of all kṣatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the sūrya-vaṁśa
kṣatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gītā is as good as the Vedas, being spoken by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apauruṣeya, superhuman. Since
the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are, without human interpretation,
the Gītā must therefore be accepted without mundane interpretation. The mundane
wranglers may speculate on the Gītā in their own ways, but that is not
Bhagavad-gītā as it is. Therefore, Bhagavad-gītā has to be accepted as it is,
from the disciplic succession, and it is described herein that the Lord spoke to
the sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Manu, and Manu spoke to his son
Ikṣvāku.

### 4.2


evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

sa kāleneha mahatā

yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa

evam—thus; paramparā—disciplic succession; prāptam—received; imam—this science;
rājarṣayaḥ—the saintly kings; viduḥ—understood; saḥ—that knowledge; kālena—in
the course of time; iha—in this world; mahatā—by great; yogaḥ—the science of
one’s relationship with the Supreme; naṣṭaḥ—scattered; parantapa—O Arjuna,
subduer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of
time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be
lost.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated that the Gītā was especially meant for the saintly kings
because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over the citizens. Certainly
Bhagavad-gītā was never meant for the demonic persons, who would dissipate its
value for no one’s benefit and would devise all types of interpretations
according to personal whims. As soon as the original purpose was scattered by
the motives of the unscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to
reestablish the disciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by
the Lord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore He
declared that the purpose of the Gītā appeared to be lost. In the same way, at
the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gītā (especially in
