PURPORT

The word sṛjāmi is significant herein. Sṛjāmi cannot be used in the sense of
creation. because, according to the previous verse, there is no creation of the
Lord’s form or body, since all of the forms are eternally existent. Therefore
sṛjāmi means that the Lord manifests Himself as He is. Although the Lord appears
on schedule, namely at the end of Dvāpara-yuga of the twenty-eighth millennium
of the eighth Manu, in one day of Brahmā, still He has no obligation to adhere
to such rules and regulations because He is completely free to act in many ways
at His will. He therefore appears by His own will whenever there is a
predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true religion. Principles
of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and any discrepancy in the matter of
properly executing the rules of the Vedas makes one irreligious. In the
Bhāgavatam it is stated that such principles are the laws of the Lord. Only the
Lord can manufacture a system of religion. The Vedas are also accepted as
originally spoken by the Lord Himself to Brahmā, from within his heart.
Therefore, the principles of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (dharmaṁ tu sākṣāt-bhagavat-praṇītam). These
principles are clearly indicated throughout the Bhagavad-gītā. The purpose of
the Vedas is to establish such principles under the order of the Supreme Lord,
and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the Gītā, that the highest principle
of religion is to surrender unto Him only, and nothing more. The Vedic
principles push one towards complete surrender unto Him; and, whenever such
principles are disturbed by the demonic, the Lord appears. From the Bhāgavatam
we understand that Lord Buddha is the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa who appeared when
materialism was rampant and materialists were using the pretext of the authority
of the Vedas. Although there are certain restrictive rules and regulations
regarding animal sacrifice for particular purposes in the Vedas, people of
demonic tendency still took to animal sacrifice without reference to the Vedic
principles. Lord Buddha appeared to stop this nonsense and to establish the
Vedic principles of nonviolence. Therefore each and every avatāra, or
incarnation of the Lord, has a particular mission, and they are all described in
the revealed scriptures. No one should be accepted as an avatāra unless he is
referred to by scriptures. It is not a fact that the Lord appears only on Indian
soil. He can advent Himself anywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to
appear. In each and every incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can
be understood by the particular people under their particular circumstances. But
the mission is the same—to lead people to God consciousness and obedience to the
principles of religion. Sometimes He descends personally, and sometimes He sends
His bona fide representative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in
some disguised form.

The principles of the Bhagavad-gītā were spoken to Arjuna, and, for that matter,
to other highly elevated persons, because he was highly advanced compared to
ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Two plus two equals four is a
mathematical principle that is true both in the beginner’s arithmetic class and
in the advanced class as well. Still, there are higher and lower mathematics. In
all incarnations of the Lord, therefore, the same principles are taught, but
they appear to be higher and lower in varied circumstances. The higher
principles of religion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and the four
statuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purpose of the
mission of incarnations is to arouse Kṛṣṇa consciousness everywhere. Such
consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only under different circumstances.

### 4.8


paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

paritrāṇāya—for the deliverance; sādhūnām—of the devotees; vināśāya—for the
annihilation; ca—also; duṣkṛtām—of the miscreants; dharma—principles of
religion; saṁsthāpana-arthāya—to reestablish; sambhavāmi—I do appear;
yuge—millennium; yuge—after millennium.

TRANSLATION

In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after
millennium.

PURPORT

According to Bhagavad-gītā, a sādhu (holyman) is a man in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A
person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has the qualifications of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness wholly and fully, he is to be understood to be a sādhu. And
duṣkṛtam applies to one who doesn’t care for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Such
miscreants, or duṣkṛtam, are described as foolish and the lowest of mankind,
even though they may be decorated with mundane education; whereas another
person, who is one hundred percent engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is accepted
as sādhu, even though such a person may neither be learned nor well cultured. As
far as the atheistic are concerned, it is not necessary for the Supreme Lord to
appear as He is to destroy them, as He did with the demons Rāvaṇa and Kaṁsa. The
Lord has many agents who are quite competent to vanquish demons. But the Lord
especially descends to appease His unalloyed devotees, who are always harassed
by the demonic. The demon harasses the devotee, even though the latter may
happen to be his kin. Although Prahlāda Mahārāja was the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu,
he was nonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devakī, the mother of
Kṛṣṇa, was the sister of Kaṁsa, she and her husband Vasudeva were persecuted
only because Kṛṣṇa was to be born of them. So Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared primarily to
deliver Devakī, rather than kill Kaṁsa, but both were performed simultaneously.
Therefore it is said here that to deliver the devotee and vanquish the demon
miscreants, the Lord appears in different incarnations.

In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, the following verses summarize
these principles of incarnation:

sṛṣṭi-hetu yei mūrti prapañce avatare sei īśvara-mūrti ‘avatāra’ nāma dhare
māyātita paravyome savāra avasthāna viśve ‘avatāri’ dhare ‘avatāra’ nāma.

“The avatāra, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of God for
material manifestation. And the particular form of the Personality of Godhead
who so descends is called an incarnation, or avatāra. Such incarnations are
situated in the spiritual world, the kingdom of God. When they descend to the
material creation, they assume the name avatāra.”

There are various kinds of avatāras, such as puruṣāvatāras, guṇāvatāras,
līlāvatāras, śaktyāveśa avatāras, manvantara-avatāras and yugāvatāras—all
appearing on schedule all over the universe. But Lord Kṛṣṇa is the primeval
Lord, the fountainhead of all avatāras. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa descends for the specific
purposes of mitigating the anxieties of the pure devotees, who are very anxious
to see Him in His original Vṛndāvana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose of
the Kṛṣṇa avatāra is to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.

The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. This indicates
that He incarnates also in the age of Kali. As stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
the incarnation in the age of Kali is Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who spread the
worship of Kṛṣṇa by the saṅkīrtana movement (congregational chanting of the holy
names), and spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout India. He predicted that this
culture of saṅkīrtana would be broadcast all over the world, from town to town
and village to village. Lord Caitanya as the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, the
Personality of Godhead, is described secretly but not directly in the
confidential parts of the revealed scriptures, such as the Upaniṣads,
Mahābhārata, Bhāgavatam, etc. The devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa are much attracted by
the saṅkīrtana movement of Lord Caitanya. This avatāra of the Lord does not kill
the miscreants, but delivers them by the causeless mercy of the Lord.

### 4.9


janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

janma—birth; karma—work; ca—also; me—of Mine; divyam—transcendental; evam—like
this; yaḥ—anyone who; vetti—knows; tattvataḥ—in reality; tyaktvā—leaving aside;
deham—this body; punaḥ—again; janma—birth; na—never; eti—does attain; mām—unto
Me; eti—does attain; saḥ—he; arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does
not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

The Lord’s descent from His transcendental abode is already explained in the 6th
verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance of the Personality of
Godhead is already liberated from material bondage, and therefore he returns to
the kingdom of God immediately after quitting this present material body. Such
liberation of the living entity from material bondage is not at all easy. The
impersonalists and the yogīs attain liberation only after much trouble and many,
many births. Even then, the liberation they achieve—merging into the impersonal
brahmajyoti of the Lord—is only partial, and there is the risk of returning
again to this material world. But the devotee, simply by understanding the
transcendental nature of the body and activities of the Lord, attains the abode
of the Lord after ending this body and does not run the risk of returning again
to this material world. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is stated that the Lord has
many, many forms and incarnations: advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam.
Although there are many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and
the same Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this fact with
conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholars and empiric
philosophers. As stated in the Vedas:

eko devo nitya-līlānurakto bhakta-vyāpī hṛdy antarātmā.

“The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many, many
transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyed devotees.” This Vedic
version is confirmed in this verse of the Gītā personally by the Lord. He who
accepts this truth on the strength of the authority of the Vedas and of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and who does not waste time in philosophical
speculations attains the highest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by
accepting this truth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The
Vedic version, “tattvamasi,” is actually applied in this case. Anyone who
understands Lord Kṛṣṇa to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord, “You are
the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead” is certainly liberated
instantly, and consequently his entrance into the transcendental association of
the Lord is guaranteed. In other words, such a faithful devotee of the Lord
attains perfection, and this is confirmed by the following Vedic assertion:

tam eva viditvātimṛtyumeti nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ayanāya.

One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death simply by
knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no alternative
because anyone who does not understand Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance. Consequently he will not attain
salvation, simply, so to speak, by licking the outer surface of the bottle of
honey, or by interpreting the Bhagavad-gītā according to mundane scholarship.
Such empiric philosophers may assume very important roles in the material world,
but they are not necessarily eligible for liberation. Such puffed up mundane
scholars have to wait for the causeless mercy of the devotee of the Lord. One
should therefore cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness with faith and knowledge, and in
this way attain perfection.


### 4.10


vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā

man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ

bahavo jñāna-tapasā

pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

vīta—freed from; rāga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhāḥ—anger; mat-mayā—fully in
Me; mām—unto Me; upāśritāḥ—being fully situated; bahavaḥ—many; jñāna—knowledge;
tapasā—by penance; pūtāḥ—being purified; mat-bhāvam—transcendental love for Me;
āgatāḥ—attained.

TRANSLATION

Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and
taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purifled by knowledge
of Me—and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me.

PURPORT

As described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too materially
affected to understand the personal nature of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Generally, people who are attached to the bodily conception of life are so
absorbed in materialism that it is almost impossible for them to understand that
there is a transcendental body which is imperishable, full of knowledge and
eternally blissful. In the materialistic concept, the body is perishable, full
of ignorance and completely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this
same bodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of the
Lord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic material
manifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to be
impersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, the conception of
retaining the personality after liberation from matter frightens them. When they
are informed that spiritual life is also individual and personal, they become
afraid of becoming persons again, and so they naturally prefer a kind of merging
into the impersonal void. Generally, they compare the living entities to the
bubbles of the ocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the highest perfection
of spiritual existence attainable without individual personality. This is a kind
of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge of spiritual existence.
Furthermore there are many persons who cannot understand spiritual existence at
all. Being embarassed by so many theories and by contradictions of various types
of philosophical speculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly
conclude that there is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void.
Such people are in a diseased condition of life. Some people are too materially
attached and therefore do not give attention to spiritual life, some of them
want to merge into the supreme spiritual cause, and some of them disbelieve in
everything, being angry at all sorts of spiritual speculation out of
hopelessness. This last class of men take to the shelter of some kind of
intoxication, and their affective hallucinations are sometimes accepted as
spiritual vision. One has to get rid of all three stages of attachment to the
material world: negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual personal
identity, and the conception of void that underlies the frustration of life. To
get free from these three stages of the material concept of life, one has to
take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fide spiritual master, and
follow the disciplines and regulative principles of devotional life. The last
stage of the devotional life is called bhāva, or transcendental love of Godhead.

According to Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the science of devotional service:

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo ’tha bhajana-kriyā tato ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt
tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati sādhakānām
ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ.

“In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-realization. This
will bring one to the stage of trying to associate with persons who are
spiritually elevated. In next stage one becomes initiated by an elevated
spiritual master, and under his instruction the neophyte devotee begins the
process of devotional service. By execution of devotional service under the
guidance of the spiritual master, one becomes free from all material attachment,
attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste for hearing about
the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This taste leads one further
forward to attachment for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is matured in bhāva, or the
preliminary stage of transcendental love of God. Real love for God is called
premā, the highest perfectional stage of life.” In the premā stage there is
constant engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. So, by the
slow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona fide
spiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed from all
material attachment, from the fearfulness of one’s individual spiritual
personality, and from the frustrations resulting from void philosophy. Then one
can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme Lord.
