**Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra**

### 1.1


dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca

dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

kim akurvata sañjaya

dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ—King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; uvāca—said; dharma-kṣetre—in the place of
pilgrimage; kuru-kṣetre—in the place named Kurukṣetra; samavetāḥ—assembled;
yuyatsavaḥ—desiring to fight; māmakāḥ—my party (sons); pāṇḍavāḥ—the sons of
Pāṇḍu; ca—and; eva—certainly; kim—what; akurvata—did they do; sañjaya—O Sañjaya.

**TRANSLATION**

Dhṛtarāṣṭra said: O Sañjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at
Kurukṣetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pāṇḍu do, being desirous to fight?

**PURPORT**

Bhagavad-gītā is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gītā-māhātmya (Glorification of the Gītā). There it says that one should read
Bhagavad-gītā very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and try to understand it without personally motivated interpretations.
The example of clear understanding is there in the Bhagavad-gītā itself, in the
way the teaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gītā directly from the
Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand Bhagavad-gītā in that line of
disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all
studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures of the world. One will find in the
Bhagavad-gītā all that is contained in other scriptures, but the reader will
also find things which are not to be found elsewhere. That is the specific
standard of the Gītā. It is the perfect theistic science because it is directly
spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The topics discussed by Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Sañjaya, as described in the
Mahābhārata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It is
understood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, which
is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial time of the Vedic age. It
was spoken by the Lord when He was present personally on this planet for the
guidance of mankind.

The word dharma-kṣetra (a place where religious rituals are performed) is
significant because, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the father of the
Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of his sons’ ultimate victory.
In his doubt, he inquired from his secretary Sañjaya, “What did my sons and the
sons of Pāṇḍu do?” He was confident that both his sons and the sons of his
younger brother Pāṇḍu were assembled in that Field of Kurukṣetra for a
determined engagement of the war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not
want a compromise between the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of
the fate of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be
fought at Kurukṣetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as a place of
worship—even for the denizens of heaven—Dhṛtarāṣṭra became very fearful about
the influence of the holy place on the outcome of the battle. He knew very well
that this would influence Arjuna and the sons of Pāṇḍu favorably, because by
nature they were all virtuous. Sañjaya was a student of Vyāsa, and therefore, by
the mercy of Vyāsa, Sañjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra
even while he was in the room of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. And so, Dhṛtarāṣṭra asked him
about the situation on the battlefield.

Both the Pāṇḍavas and the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra belong to the same family, but
Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s mind is disclosed herein. He deliberately claimed only his sons as
Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pāṇḍu from the family heritage. One can thus
understand the specific position of Dhṛtarāṣṭra in his relationship with his
nephews, the sons of Pāṇḍu. As in the paddy field the unnecessary plants are
taken out, so it is expected from the very beginning of these topics that in the
religious field of Kurukṣetra where the father of religion, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, was
present, the unwanted plants like Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s son Duryodhana and others would
be wiped out and the thoroughly religious persons, headed by Yudhiṣṭhira, would
be established by the Lord. This is the significance of the words dharma-kṣetre
and kuru-kṣetre, apart from their historical and Vedic importance.

### 1.2


sañjaya uvāca

dṛṣṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ

vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanas tadā

ācāryam upasaṅgamya

rājā vacanam abravīt

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; dṛṣṭvā—after seeing; tu—but; pāṇḍava-anīkam—the
soldiers of the Pāṇḍavas; vyūḍham—arranged in military phalanx; duryodhanaḥ—King
Duryodhana; tadā—at that time; ācāryam—the teacher; upasaṅgamya—approaching
nearby; rājā—the king; vacanam—words; abravīt—spoke.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons of Pāṇḍu,
King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak the following words:

**PURPORT**

Dhṛtarāṣṭra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of spiritual
vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind in the matter of
religion, and he was sure that they could never reach an understanding with the
Pāṇḍavas, who were all pious since birth. Still he was doubtful about the
influence of the place of pilgrimage, and Sañjaya could understand his motive in
asking about the situation on the battlefield. He wanted, therefore, to
encourage the despondent King, and thus he warned him that his sons were not
going to make any sort of compromise under the influence of the holy place.
Sañjaya therefore informed the King that his son, Duryodhana, after seeing the
military force of the Pāṇḍavas, at once went to the commander-in-chief,
Droṇācārya, to inform him of the real position. Although Duryodhana is mentioned
as the king, he still had to go to the commander on account of the seriousness
of the situation. He was therefore quite fit to be a politician. But
Duryodhana’s diplomatic veneer could not disguise the fear he felt when he saw
the military arrangement of the Pāṇḍavas.

### 1.3


paśyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām

ācārya mahatīṁ camūm

vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa

tava śiṣyeṇa dhīmatā

paśya—behold; etām—this; pāṇḍu-putrāṇām—of the sons of Pāṇḍu; ācārya—O teacher;
mahatīm—great; camūm—military force; vyuḍham—arranged; drupada-putreṇa—by the
son of Drupada; tava—your; śiṣyeṇa—disciple; dhīmatā—very intelligent.

**TRANSLATION**

O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pāṇḍu, so expertly arranged
by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.

**PURPORT**

Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of Droṇācārya, the
great brāhmaṇa commander-in-chief. Droṇācārya had some political quarrel with
King Drupada, the father of Draupadī, who was Arjuna’s wife. As a result of this
quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which he received the
benediction of having a son who would be able to kill Droṇācārya. Droṇācārya
knew this perfectly well, and yet, as a liberal brāhmaṇa, he did not hesitate to
impart all his military secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, was
entrusted to him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra,
Dhṛṣṭadyumna took the side of the Pāṇḍavas, and it was he who arranged for their
military phalanx, after having learned the art from Droṇācārya. Duryodhana
pointed out this mistake of Droṇācārya’s so that he might be alert and
uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted to point out also that he
should not be similarly lenient in battle against the Pāṇḍavas, who were also
Droṇācārya’s affectionate students. Arjuna, especially, was his most
affectionate and brilliant student. Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in
the fight would lead to defeat.

### 1.4


atra śūrā maheṣv-āsā

bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi

yuyudhāno virāṭaś ca

drupadaś ca mahā-rathaḥ

atra—here; śūrāḥ—heroes; maheṣvāsāḥ—mighty bowmen; bhīma-arjuna—Bhīma and
Arjuna; samāḥ—equal; yudhi—in the fight; yuyudhānaḥ—Yuyudhāna; virāṭaḥ—Virāṭa;
ca—also; drupadaḥ—Drupada; ca—also; mahārathaḥ—great fighter.

**TRANSLATION**

Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhīma and
Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhāna, Virāṭa and Drupada.

**PURPORT**

Even though Dhṛṣṭadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face of
Droṇācārya’s very great power in the military art, there were many others who
were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana as great stumbling
blocks on the path of victory because each and every one of them was as
formidable as Bhīma and Arjuna. He knew the strength of Bhīma and Arjuna, and
thus he compared the others with them.

### 1.5


dhṛṣṭaketuś cekitānaḥ

kāśirājaś ca vīryavān

purujit kuntibhojaś ca

śaibyaś ca nara-puṅgavaḥ

dhṛṣṭaketuḥ—Dhṛṣṭaketu; cekitānaḥ—Cekitāna; kāśirājaḥ—Kaśirāja; ca—also;
vīryavān—very powerful; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojaḥ—Kuntibhoja; ca—and;
śaibyaḥ—Śaibya; ca—and; nara-puṅgavaḥ—heroes in human society.

**TRANSLATION**

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhṛṣṭaketu, Cekitāna,
Kāśirāja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Śaibya.

### 1.6


yudhāmanyuś ca vikrānta

uttamaujāś ca vīryavān

saubhadro draupadeyāś ca

sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

yudhāmanyuḥ—Yudhāmanyu; ca—and; vikrāntaḥ—mighty; uttamaujāḥ—Uttamaujā; ca—and;
vīryavān—very powerful; saubhadraḥ—the son of Subhadrā; draupadeyāḥ—the sons of
Draupadī; ca—and; sarve—all; eva—certainly; mahā-rathāḥ—great chariot fighters.

**TRANSLATION**

There are the mighty Yudhāmanyu, the very powerful Uttamaujā, the son of
Subhadrā and the sons of Draupadī. All these warriors are great chariot
fighters.

### 1.7


asmākaṁ tu viśiṣṭā ye

tān nibodha dvijottama

nāyakā mama sainyasya

saṁjñārthaṁ tān bravīmi te

asmākam—our; tu—but; viśiṣṭāḥ—especially powerful; ye—those; tān—them;
nibodha—just take note, be informed; dvijottama—the best of the brāhmaṇas;
nāyakāḥ—captains; mama—my; sainyasya—of the soldiers; saṁjñā-artham—for
information; tān—them; bravīmi—I am speaking; te—your.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the brāhmaṇas, for your information, let me tell you about the
captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

### 1.8


bhavān bhīṣmaś ca karṇaś ca

kṛpaś ca samitiṁ-jayaḥ

aśvatthāmā vikarṇaś ca

saumadattis tathaiva ca

bhavān—yourself; bhīṣmaḥ—Grandfather Bhīṣma; ca—also; karṇaḥ—Karṇa; ca—and;
kṛpaḥ—Kṛpa; ca—and; samitiñjayaḥ—always victorious in battle;
aśvatthāmā—Aśvatthāmā; vikarṇaḥ—Vikarṇa; ca—as well as; saumadattiḥ—the son of
Somadatta; tathā—and as; eva—certainly; ca—and.

**TRANSLATION**

There are personalities like yourself, Bhīṣma, Karṇa, Kṛpa, Aśvatthāmā, Vikarṇa
and the son of Somadatta called Bhuriśravā, who are always victorious in battle.

**PURPORT**

Duryodhana mentioned the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom are
ever-victorious. Vikarṇa is the brother of Duryodhana, Aśvatthāmā is the son of
Droṇācārya, and Saumadatti, or Bhūriśravā, is the son of the King of the
Bāhlīkas. Karṇa is the half brother of Arjuna, as he was born of Kuntī before
her marriage with King Pāṇḍu. Kṛpācārya married the twin sister of Droṇācārya.
### 1.9


anye ca bahavaḥ śūrā

mad-arthe tyakta-jīvitāḥ

nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ

sarve yuddha-viśāradāḥ

anye—many others; ca—also; bahavaḥ—in great numbers; śūrāḥ—heroes; mad-arthe-for
my sake; tyakta-jīvitāḥ—prepared to risk life; nānā—many; śastra—weapons;
praharaṇāḥ—equipped with; sarve—all of them; yuddha—battle;
viśāradāḥ—experienced in military science.

**TRANSLATION**

There are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives for my
sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds of weapons, and all are
experienced in military science.

**PURPORT**

As far as the others are concerned—like Jayadratha, Kṛtavarmā, Śalya, etc.—all
are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana’s sake. In other words, it
is already concluded that all of them would die in the Battle of Kurukṣetra for
joining the party of the sinful Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of course, confident
of his victory on account of the above-mentioned combined strength of his
friends.

### 1.10


aparyāptaṁ tad asmākaṁ

balaṁ bhīṣmābhirakṣitam

paryāptaṁ tv idam eteṣāṁ

balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣitam

aparyāptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asmākam—of ours; balam—strength; bhīṣma—by
Grandfather Bhīṣma; abhirakṣitam—perfectly protected; paryāptam—limited; tu—but;
idam—all these; eteṣām—of the Pāṇḍavas; balam—strength; bhīma—by Bhīma;
abhirakṣitam—carefully protected.

**TRANSLATION**

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather
Bhīṣma, whereas the strength of the Pāṇḍavas, carefully protected by Bhīma, is
limited.

**PURPORT**

Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He thinks
that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being specifically
protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather Bhīṣma. On the other
hand, the forces of the Pāṇḍavas are limited, being protected by a less
experienced general, Bhīma, who is like a fig in the presence of Bhīṣma.
Duryodhana was always envious of Bhīma because he knew perfectly well that if he
should die at all, he would only be killed by Bhīma. But at the same time, he
was confident of his victory on account of the presence of Bhīṣma, who was a far
superior general. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle victorious
was well ascertained.

### 1.11


ayaneṣu ca sarveṣu

yathā-bhāgam avasthitāḥ

bhīṣmam evābhirakṣantu

bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

ayaneṣu—in the strategic points; ca—also; sarveṣu—everywhere; yathābhāgam—as
they are differently arranged; avasthitāḥ—situated; bhīṣmam—unto Grandfather
Bhīṣma; eva—certainly; abhirakṣantu—support may be given; bhavantaḥ—all of you;
sarve—respectively; eva—certainly; hi—and exactly.

**TRANSLATION**

Now all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhīṣma, standing at your
respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.

**PURPORT**

Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhīṣma, further considered that others
might think that they had been considered less important, so in his usual
diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in the above words. He
emphasized that Bhīṣmadeva was undoubtedly the greatest hero, but he was an old
man, so everyone must especially think of his protection from all sides. He
might become engaged in the fight, and the enemy might take advantage of his
full engagement on one side. Therefore, it was important that other heroes would
not leave their strategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.
Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on the presence
of Bhīṣmadeva. He was confident of the full support of Bhīṣmadeva and Droṇācārya
in the battle because he well knew that they did not even speak a word when
Arjuna’s wife Draupadī, in her helpless condition, had appealed to them for
justice while she was being forced to strip naked in the presence of all the
great generals in the assembly. Although he knew that the two generals had some
sort of affection for the Pāṇḍavas, he hoped that all such affection would now
be completely given up by them, as was customary during the gambling
performances.

### 1.12


tasya sañjanayan harṣaṁ

kuru-vṛddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ

siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyoccaiḥ

śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

tasya—his; sañjanayan—increasing; harṣam—cheerfulness; kuru-vṛddhaḥ—the
grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhīṣma); pitāmahaḥ—the grandfather;
siṁha-nādam—roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya—vibrating; uccaiḥ—very loudly;
śaṅkham—conchshell; dadhmau—blew; pratāpavān—the valiant.

**TRANSLATION**

Then Bhīṣma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of
the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly like the sound of a lion, giving
Duryodhana joy.

**PURPORT**

The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of the
heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion for him he
tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly, befitting his position
as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the conchshell, he informed his
depressed grandson Duryodhana that he had no chance of victory in the battle,
because the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa was on the other side. But still, it was his duty
to conduct the fight, and no pains would be spared in that connection.

### 1.13


tataḥ śaṅkhāś ca bheryaś ca

paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ

sahasaivābhyahanyanta

sa śabdas tumulo ’bhavat

tataḥ—thereafter; śaṅkhāḥ—conchshells; ca—also; bheryaḥ—bugles; ca—and;
paṇava-ānaka—trumpets and drums; go-mukhāḥ—horns; sahasā—all of a sudden;
eva—certainly; abhyahanyanta—being simultaneously sounded; saḥ—that;
śabdaḥ—combined sound; tumulaḥ—tumultuous; abhavat—became.

**TRANSLATION**

After that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all suddenly
sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

### 1.14


tataḥ śvetair hayair yukte

mahati syandane sthitau

mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaś caiva

divyau śaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ

tataḥ—thereafter; śvetaiḥ—by white; hayaiḥ—horses; yukte—being yoked with;
mahati—in the great; syandane—chariot; sthitau—so situated; mādhavaḥ—Kṛṣṇa (the
husband of the goddess of fortune); pāṇḍavaḥ—Arjuna (the son of Pāṇḍu); ca—also;
eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental; śaṅkhau—conchshells; pradadhmatuḥ—sounded.

**TRANSLATION**

On the other side, both Lord Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot
drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.

**PURPORT**

In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhīṣmadeva, the conchshells in the
hands of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The sounding of the
transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of victory for the
other side because Kṛṣṇa was on the side of the Pāṇḍavas. Jayas tu
pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ yeṣāṁ pakṣe janārdanaḥ. Victory is always with persons like the
sons of Pāṇḍu because Lord Kṛṣṇa is associated with them. And whenever and
wherever the Lord is present, the goddess of fortune is also there because the
goddess of fortune never lives alone without her husband. Therefore, victory and
fortune were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental sound produced
by the conchshell of Viṣṇu, or Lord Kṛṣṇa. Besides that, the chariot on which
both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the fire-god) to Arjuna, and
this indicated that this chariot was capable of conquering all sides, wherever
it was drawn over the three worlds.

### 1.15


pāñcajanyaṁ hṛṣīkeśo

devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ

pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śaṅkhaṁ

bhīma-karmā vṛkodaraḥ

pāñcajanyam—the conchshell named Pāñcajanya; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Hṛṣīkeśa (Kṛṣṇa, the Lord
who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the conchshell named
Devadatta; dhanañjayaḥ—Dhanañjaya (Arjuna, the winner of wealth); pauṇḍram—the
conch named Pauṇḍram; dadhmau—blew; mahā-śaṅkham—the terrific conchshell;
bhīma-karmā—one who performs Herculean tasks; vṛkodaraḥ—the voracious eater
(Bhīma).

**TRANSLATION**

Then, Lord Kṛṣṇa blew His conchshell, called Pāñcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the
Devadatta; and Bhīma, the voracious eater and performer of Herculean tasks, blew
his terrific conchshell called Pauṇḍram.

**PURPORT**

Lord Kṛṣṇa is referred to as Hṛṣīkeśa in this verse because He is the owner of
all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and, therefore, the
senses of the living entities are also part and parcel of His senses. The
impersonalists cannot account for the senses of the living entities, and
therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as sense-less,
or impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs
their senses. But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity,
and in the case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the
Battlefield of Kurukṣetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses
of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hṛṣīkeśa. The Lord has different
names according to His different activities. For example, His name is
Madhusūdana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu; His name is Govinda
because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Vāsudeva
because He appeared as the son of Vasudeva; His name is Devakī-nandana because
He accepted Devakī as His mother; His name is Yaśodā-nandana because He awarded
His childhood pastimes to Yaśodā at Vṛndāvana; His name is Pārtha-sārathi
because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is
Hṛṣīkeśa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra.

Arjuna is referred to as Dhanañjaya in this verse because he helped his elder
brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the King to make expenditures
for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhīma is known as Vṛkodara because he could
eat as voraciously as he could perform Herculean tasks, such as killing the
demon Hiḍimba. So, the particular types of conchshell blown by the different
personalities on the side of the Pāṇḍavas, beginning with the Lord’s, were all
very encouraging to the fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such
credits, nor the presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme director, nor that of the
goddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose the battle—and that was
the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.

### 1.16-18


anantavijayaṁ rājā

kuntī-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ

nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca

sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau

kāśyaś ca parameṣv-āsaḥ

śikhaṇḍī ca mahā-rathaḥ

dhṛṣṭadyumno virāṭaś ca

sātyakiś cāparājitaḥ

drupado draupadeyāś ca

sarvaśaḥ pṛthivī-pate

saubhadraś ca mahā-bāhuḥ

śaṅkhān dadhmuḥ pṛthak pṛthak

**TRANSLATION**

King Yudhiṣṭhira, the son of Kuntī, blew his conchshell, the Anantavijaya, and
Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughoṣa and Maṇipuṣpaka. That great archer the King
of Kāśī, the great fighter Śikhaṇḍī, Dhṛṣṭadyumna, Virāṭa and the unconquerable
Sātyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadī, and the others, O King, such as the son
of Subhadrā, greatly armed, all blew their respective conchshells.

**PURPORT**

Sañjaya informed King Dhṛtarāṣṭra very tactfully that his unwise policy of
deceiving the sons of Pāṇḍu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons on the seat
of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already clearly indicated that
the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in that great battle. Beginning with the
grandsire, Bhīṣma, down to the grandsons like Abhimanyu and others—including
kings from many states of the world—all were present there, and all were doomed.
The whole catastrophe was due to King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, because he encouraged the
policy followed by his sons.
### 1.19


sa ghoṣo dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ

hṛdayāni vyadārayat

nabhaś ca pṛthivīṁ caiva

tumulo ’bhyanunādayan

saḥ—that; ghoṣaḥ—vibration; dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām—of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
hṛdayāni—hearts; vyadārayat—shattered; nabhaḥ—the sky; ca—also; pṛthivīm—the
surface of the earth; ca—also; eva—certainly; tumulaḥ—uproarious; abhyanunādayan—by resounding.

**TRANSLATION**

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons
of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

**PURPORT**

When Bhīṣma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their respective
conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of the Pāṇḍavas. Such
occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular verse it is mentioned that
the hearts of the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were shattered by the sounds vibrated by
the Pāṇḍavas’ party. This is due to the Pāṇḍavas and their confidence in Lord
Kṛṣṇa. One who takes shelter of the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in
the midst of the greatest calamity.

### 1.20


atha vyavasthitān dṛṣṭvā

dhārtarāṣṭrān kapi-dhvajaḥ

pravṛtte śastra-sampāte

dhanur udyamya pāṇḍavaḥ

hṛṣīkeśaṁ tadā vākyam

idam āha mahī-pate

atha—thereupon; vyavasthitān—situated; dṛṣṭvā—looking on; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons
of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; kapi-dhvajaḥ—one whose flag is marked with Hanumān;
pravṛtte—while about to be engaged; śastra-sampāte—the arrows released;
dhanuḥ—bow; udyamya—after taking up; pāṇḍavaḥ—the son of Pāṇḍu (Arjuna);
hṛṣīkeśam—unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; tadā—at that time; vākyam—words; idam—these;
āha—said; mahī-pate—O King.

**TRANSLATION**

O King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Pāṇḍu, who was seated in his chariot,
his flag marked with Hanumān, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows,
looking at the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. O King, Arjuna then spoke to Hṛṣīkeśa
[Kṛṣṇa] these words:

**PURPORT**

The battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above statement
that the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra were more or less disheartened by the unexpected
arrangement of military force by the Pāṇḍavas, who were guided by the direct
instructions of Lord Kṛṣṇa on the battlefield. The emblem of Hanumān on the flag
of Arjuna is another sign of victory because Hanumān cooperated with Lord Rāma
in the battle between Rāma and Rāvaṇa, and Lord Rāma emerged victorious. Now
both Rāma and Hanumān were present on the chariot of Arjuna to help him. Lord
Kṛṣṇa is Rāma Himself, and wherever Lord Rāma is, His eternal servitor Hanumān
and His eternal consort Sītā, the goddess of fortune, are present. Therefore,
Arjuna had no cause to fear any enemies whatsoever. And above all, the Lord of
the senses, Lord Kṛṣṇa, was personally present to give him direction. Thus, all
good counsel was available to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In
such auspicious conditions, arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee, lay
the signs of assured victory.

### 1.21-22


arjuna uvāca

senayor ubhayor madhye

rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’cyuta

yāvad etān nirīkṣe ’haṁ

yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān

kair mayā saha yoddhavyam

asmin raṇa-samudyame

arjunaḥ—Arjuna; uvāca—said; senayoḥ—of the armies; ubhayoḥ—of both the parties;
madhye—in between them; ratham—the chariot; sthāpaya—please keep; me—my;
acyuta—O infallible one; yāvat—as long as; etān—all these; nirīkṣe—may look;
aham—I; yoddhu-kāmān—desiring to fight; avasthitān—arrayed on the battlefield;
kaiḥ—with whom; mayā—by me; saha—with; yoddhavyam—to fight with; asmin—in this;
raṇa—strife; samudyame—in the attempt.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so
that I may see who is present here, who is desirous of fighting, and with whom I
must contend in this great battle attempt.

**PURPORT**

Although Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His causeless
mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never fails in His
affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed herein as infallible. As
charioteer, He had to carry out the orders of Arjuna, and since He did not
hesitate to do so, He is addressed as infallible. Although He had accepted the
position of a charioteer for His devotee, His supreme position was not
challenged. In all circumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and
His servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready to
render a service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is always seeking an
opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes greater pleasure in
His pure devotee’s assuming the advantageous postion of ordering Him than He
does in being the giver of orders. As master, everyone is under His orders, and
no one is above Him to order Him. But when he finds that a pure devotee is
ordering Him, He obtains transcendental pleasure, although He is the infallible
master of all circumstances.

As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with his cousins
and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield by the obstinacy of
Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peaceful negotiation. Therefore, he
was very anxious to see who the leading persons present on the battlefield were.
Although there was no question of a peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he
wanted to see them again, and to see how much they were bent upon demanding an
unwanted war.


### 1.23


yotsyamānān avekṣe ’haṁ

ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrasya durbuddher

yuddhe priya-cikīrṣavaḥ

yotsyamānān—those who will be fighting; avekṣe—let me see; aham—I; ye—who;
ete—those; atra—here; samāgatāḥ—assembled; dhārtarāṣṭrasya—the son of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra; durbuddheḥ—evil-minded; yuddhe—in the fight; priya—well;
cikīrṣavaḥ—wishing.

**TRANSLATION**

Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded
son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

**PURPORT**

It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of the
Pāṇḍavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father, Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of Duryodhana must have been
birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to see them in the battlefield before
the fight was begun, just to learn who they were, but he had no intention of
proposing peace negotiations with them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see
them to make an estimate of the strength which he had to face, although he was
quite confident of victory because Kṛṣṇa was sitting by his side.

### 1.24


sañjaya uvāca

evam ukto hṛṣīkeśo

guḍākeśena bhārata

senayor ubhayor madhye

sthāpayitvā rathottamam

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; evam—thus; uktaḥ—addressed; hṛṣīkeśaḥ—Lord Kṛṣṇa;
guḍākeśena—by Arjuna; bhārata—O descendant of Bharata; senayoḥ—of armies;
ubhayoḥ—of both; madhye—in the midst of; sthāpayitvā—by placing; rathottamam—the
finest chariot.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna, Lord
Kṛṣṇa drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties.

**PURPORT**

In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Guḍākeśa. Guḍāka means sleep, and one who
conquers sleep is called guḍākeśa. Sleep also means ignorance. So Arjuna
conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his friendship with Kṛṣṇa. As a
great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he could not forget Kṛṣṇa even for a moment, because
that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the
Lord can never be free from thinking of Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, quality and
pastimes. Thus a devotee of Kṛṣṇa can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply by
thinking of Kṛṣṇa constantly. This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or samādhi. As
Hṛṣīkeśa, or the director of the senses and mind of every living entity, Kṛṣṇa
could understand Arjuna’s purpose in placing the chariot in the midst of the
armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.

### 1.25


bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ

sarveṣāṁ ca mahī-kṣitām

uvāca pārtha paśyaitān

samavetān kurūn iti

bhīṣma—Grandfather Bhīṣma; droṇa—the teacher Droṇa; pramukhataḥ—in the front of;
sarveṣām—all; ca—also; mahīkṣitām—chiefs of the world; uvāca—said; pārtha—O
Pārtha (son of Pṛthā); paśya—just behold; etān—all of them; samavetān—assembled;
kurūn—all the members of the Kuru dynasty; iti—thus.

**TRANSLATION**

In the presence of Bhīṣma, Droṇa and all other chieftains of the world,
Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord, said, Just behold, Pārtha, all the Kurus who are assembled
here.

**PURPORT**

As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Kṛṣṇa could understand what was
going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hṛṣīkeśa in this connection
indicates that He knew everything. And the word Pārtha, or the son of Kuntī or
Pṛthā, is also similarly significant in reference to Arjuna. As a friend, He
wanted to inform Arjuna that because Arjuna was the son of Pṛthā, the sister of
His own father Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of Arjuna. Now what
did Kṛṣṇa mean when He told Arjuna to “behold the Kurus”? Did Arjuna want to
stop there and not fight? Kṛṣṇa never expected such things from the son of His
aunt Pṛthā. The mind of Arjuna was thus predicated by the Lord in friendly
joking.

### 1.26


tatrāpaśyat sthitān pārthaḥ

pitṝn atha pitāmahān

ācāryān mātulān bhrātṝn

putrān pautrān sakhīṁs tathā

śvaśurān suhṛdaś caiva

senayor ubhayor api

tatra—there; apaśyat—he could see; sthitān—standing; pārthaḥ—Arjuna;
pitṝn—fathers; atha—also; pitāmahān—grandfathers; ācāryān—teachers;
mātulān—maternal uncles; bhrātṝn—brothers; putrān—sons ; pautrān—grandsons;
sakhīn—friends; tathā—too, śvaśurān—fathers-in-law; suhṛdaḥ—wellwishers;
ca—also; eva—certainly; senayoḥ—of the armies; ubhayoḥ—of both parties;
api—including.

**TRANSLATION**

There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his
fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons,
friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers—all present there.

**PURPORT**

On the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could see persons
like Bhūriśravā, who were his father’s contemporaries, grandfathers Bhīṣma and
Somadatta, teachers like Droṇācārya and Kṛpācārya, maternal uncles like Śalya
and Śakuni, brothers like Duryodhana, sons like Lakṣmaṇa, friends like
Aśvatthāmā, well-wishers like Kṛtavarmā, etc. He could see also the armies which
contained many of his friends.

### 1.27


tān samīkṣya sa kaunteyaḥ

sarvān bandhūn avasthitān

kṛpayā parayāviṣṭo

viṣīdann idam abravīt

tān—all of them; samīkṣya—after seeing; saḥ—he; kaunteyaḥ—the son of Kuntī;
sarvān—all kinds of; bandhūn—relatives; avasthitān—situated; kṛpayā—by
compassion; parayā—of a high grade; āviṣṭaḥ—overwhelmed by; viṣīdan—while
lamenting; idam—thus; abravīt—spoke.

**TRANSLATION**

When the son of Kuntī, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and
relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus:
### 1.28


arjuna uvāca

dṛṣṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛṣṇa

yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam

sīdanti mama gātrāṇi

mukhaṁ ca pariśuṣyati

arjunaḥ—Arjuna; uvāca—said; dṛṣṭvā—after seeing; imam—all these;
svajanam—kinsmen; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; yuyutsum—all in fighting spirit;
samupasthitam—all present; sīdanti—quivering; mama—my; gātrāṇi—limbs of the
body; mukham—mouth; ca—also; pariśuṣyati—drying up.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: My dear Kṛṣṇa, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in
such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth
drying up.

**PURPORT**

Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities which
are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the nondevotee, however
advanced he may be in material qualifications by education and culture, lacks in
godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen, friends and
relatives on the battlefield, was at once overwhelmed by compassion for them who
had so decided to fight amongst themselves. As far as his soldiers were
concerned, he was sympathetic from the beginning, but he felt compassion even
for the soldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their imminent death. And so
thinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and his mouth became dry. He
was more or less astonished to see their fighting spirit. Practically the whole
community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, had come to fight with him. This
overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna. Although it is not mentioned here, still
one can easily imagine that not only were Arjuna’s bodily limbs quivering and
his mouth drying up, but that he was also crying out of compassion. Such
symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a
characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said therefore:

yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ harāv
abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā mano-rathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ

“One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all the
good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord has
only material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is
hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring
material energy.” (Bhāg. 5.18.12)

### 1.29


vepathuś ca śarīre me

roma-harṣaś ca jāyate

gāṇḍīvaṁ sraṁsate hastāt

tvak caiva paridahyate

vepathuḥ—trembling of the body; ca—also; śarīre—on the body; me—my;
roma-harṣaḥ—standing of hair on end; ca—also; jāyate—is taking place;
gāṇḍīvam—the bow of Arjuna; sraṁsate—is slipping; hastāt—from the hands;
tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—burning.

**TRANSLATION**

My whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow Gāṇḍīva is
slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.

**PURPORT**

There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of standings of the
hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great spiritual ecstasy or out of
great fear under material conditions. There is no fear in transcendental
realization. Arjuna’s symptoms in this situation are out of material
fear—namely, loss of life. This is evident from other symptoms also; he became
so impatient that his famous bow Gāṇḍīva was slipping from his hands, and,
because his heart was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation of
the skin. All these are due to a material conception of life.

### 1.30


na ca śaknomy avasthātuṁ

bhramatīva ca me manaḥ

nimittāni ca paśyāmi

viparītāni keśava

na—nor; ca—also; śaknomi—am I able; avasthātum—to stay; bhramati—forgetting;
iva—as; ca—and; me—my; manaḥ—mind; nimittāni—causes; ca—also; paśyāmi—I foresee;
viparītāni—just the opposite; keśava—O killer of the demon Keśī (Kṛṣṇa).

**TRANSLATION**

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my mind is
reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Keśī demon.

**PURPORT**

Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield, and he was
forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind. Excessive attachment
for material things puts a man in a bewildering condition of existence. Bhayaṁ
dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ: such fearfulness and loss of mental equilibrium take place
in persons who are too affected by material conditions. Arjuna envisioned only
unhappiness in the battlefield—he would not be happy even by gaining victory
over the foe. The word nimitta is significant. When a man sees only frustration
in his expectations, he thinks, “Why am I here?” Everyone is interested in
himself and his own welfare. No one is interested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is
supposed to show disregard for self-interest by submission to the will of Kṛṣṇa,
who is everyone’s real self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and
therefore suffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battle
would only be a cause of lamentation for him.

### 1.31


na ca śreyo ’nupaśyāmi

hatvā sva-janam āhave

na kāṅkṣe vijayaṁ kṛṣṇa

na ca rājyaṁ sukhāni ca

na—nor; ca—also; śreyaḥ—good; anupaśyāmi—do I foresee; hatvā—by killing;
svajanam—own kinsmen; āhave—in the fight; na—nor; kānkṣe—do I desire;
vijayam—victory; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; na—nor; ca—also; rājyam—kingdom;
sukhāni—happiness thereof; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle,
nor can I, my dear Kṛṣṇa, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom, or happiness.

**PURPORT**

Without knowing that one’s self-interest is in Viṣṇu (or Kṛṣṇa), conditioned
souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in such
situations. Under delusion, they forget that Kṛṣṇa is also the cause of material
happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes for a kṣatriya.
It is said that two kinds of men, namely the kṣatriya who dies directly in front
of the battlefield under Kṛṣṇa’s personal orders and the person in the renounced
order of life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible to
enter into the sun-globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna is reluctant
even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thought that by killing
his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and therefore he was not
willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is not inclined to
cook. He has now decided to go into the forest and live a secluded life in
frustration. But as a kṣatriya, he requires a kingdom for his subsistence,
because the kṣatriyas cannot engage themselves in any other occupation. But
Arjuna has had no kingdom. Arjuna’s sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lay
in fighting with his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited
from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himself
fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.

### 1.32-35


kiṁ no rājyena govinda

kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā

yeṣām arthe kāṅkṣitaṁ no

rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni ca

ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe

prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni ca

ācāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās

tathaiva ca pitāmahāḥ

mātulāḥ śvaśurāḥ pautrāḥ

śyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

etān na hantum icchāmi

ghnato ’pi madhusūdana

api trailokya-rājyasya

hetoḥ kiṁ nu mahī-kṛte

nihatya dhārtarāṣṭrān naḥ

kā prītiḥ syāj janārdana

kim—what use; naḥ—to us; rājyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O Kṛṣṇa; kim—what;
bhogaiḥ—enjoyment; jīvitena—by living; vā—either; yeṣām—for whom; arthe—for the
matter of; kāṅkṣitam—desired; naḥ—our; rājyam—kingdom; bhogāḥ—material
enjoyment; sukhāni—all happiness; ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these;
avasthitāḥ—situated; yuddhe—in this battlefield; prāṇān—lives; tyaktvā—giving
up; dhanāni—riches; ca—also; ācāryāḥ—teachers; pitaraḥ—fathers; putrāḥ—sons;
tathā—as well as; eva—certainly; ca—also; pitāmahāḥ—grandfathers;
mātulāḥ—maternal uncles; śvaśurāḥ—fathers-in-law; pautrāḥ—grandsons;
śyālāḥ—brothers-in-law; sambandhinaḥ—relatives; tathā—as well as; etān—all
these; na—never; hantum—for killing; icchāmi—do I wish; ghnataḥ—being killed;
api—even; madhusūdana—O killer of the demon Madhu (Kṛṣṇa); api—even if;
trailokya—of the three worlds; rājyasya—of the kingdoms; hetoḥ—in exchange;
kim—what to speak of; nu—only; mahī-kṛte—for the sake of earth; nihatya—by
killing; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; naḥ—our; kā—what;
prītiḥ—pleasure; syāt—will there be; janārdana—O maintainer of all living
entities.

**TRANSLATION**

O Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life itself when
all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed in this battlefield? O
Madhusūdana, when teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives are ready to give
up their lives and properties and are standing before me, then why should I wish
to kill them, though I may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not
prepared to fight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone
this earth.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna has addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa as Govinda because Kṛṣṇa is the object of all
pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna
indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govinda is not meant for
satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the senses of Govinda then
automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially, everyone wants to
satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier for such
satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as much as
they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one takes the
opposite way—namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without
desiring to satisfy one’s own senses—then by the grace of Govinda all desires of
the living entity are satisfied. Arjuna’s deep affection for community and
family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassion for them.
He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to show his opulence to
friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his relatives and friends will
be killed in the battlefield, and he will be unable to share his opulence after
victory. This is a typical calculation of material life. The transcendental life
is, however, different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the
Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of the
Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing. Arjuna
did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need to kill them, he
desired that Kṛṣṇa kill them personally. At this point he did not know that
Kṛṣṇa had already killed them before their coming into the battlefield and that
he was only to become an instrument for Kṛṣṇa. This fact is disclosed in
following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to
retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord’s plan
that they should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliate
against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief done to the
devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His own account, but
He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees. Therefore the Lord was
determined to kill the miscreants, although Arjuna wanted to excuse them.

### 1.36


pāpam evāśrayed asmān

hatvaitān ātatāyinaḥ

tasmān nārhā vayaṁ hantuṁ

dhārtarāṣṭrān sa-bāndhavān

sva-janaṁ hi kathaṁ hatvā

sukhinaḥ syāma mādhava

pāpam—vices; eva—certainly; āśrayet—must take upon; asmān—us; hatvā—by killing;
etān—all these; ātatāyinaḥ—aggressors; tasmāt—therefore; na—never;
arhāḥ—deserving; vayam—us; hantum—to kill; dhārtarāṣṭrān—the sons of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra; svabāndhavān—along with friends; svajanam—kinsmen; hi—certainly;
katham—how; hatvā—by killing; sukhinaḥ—happy; syāma—become; mādhava—O Kṛṣṇa,
husband of the goddess of fortune.

**TRANSLATION**

Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for
us to kill the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and our friends. What should we gain, O
Kṛṣṇa, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing
our own kinsmen?

**PURPORT**

According to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a poison
giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attacks with deadly
weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupies another’s land, and 6)
one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at once to be killed, and no sin is
incurred by killing such aggressors. Such killing of aggressors is quite
befitting for any ordinary man, but Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He was
saintly by character, and therefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness.
This kind of saintliness, however, is not for a kṣatriya. Although a responsible
man in the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he should not be
cowardly. For example, Lord Rāma was so saintly that people were anxious to live
in His kingdom, (Rāma-rājya), but Lord Rāma never showed any cowardice. Rāvaṇa
was an aggressor against Rāma because he kidnapped Rāma’s wife, Sītā, but Lord
Rāma gave him sufficient lessons, unparalleled in the history of the world. In
Arjuna’s case, however, one should consider the special type of aggressors,
namely his own grandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because
of them, Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessary
against ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advised to
forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more important than any
political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than kill his own kinsmen for
political reasons, it would be better to forgive them on grounds of religion and
saintly behavior. He did not, therefore, consider such killing profitable simply
for the matter of temporary bodily happiness. After all, kingdoms and pleasures
derived therefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life and eternal
salvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna’s addressing of Kṛṣṇa as “Mādhava,”
or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is also significant in this
connection. He wanted to point out to Kṛṣṇa that, as husband of the goddess of
fortune, He should not have to induce Arjuna to take up a matter which would
ultimately bring about misfortune. Kṛṣṇa, however, never brings misfortune to
anyone, to say nothing of His devotees.
### 1.37-38


yady apy ete na paśyanti

lobhopahata-cetasaḥ

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

mitra-drohe ca pātakam

kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ

pāpād asmān nivartitum

kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ doṣaṁ

prapaśyadbhir janārdana

yadi—if; api—certainly; ete—they; na—do not; paśyanti—see; lobha—greed;
upahata—overpowered; cetasaḥ—the hearts; kula-kṣaya—in killing the family;
kṛtam—done; doṣam—fault; mitra-drohe—quarreling with friends; ca—also;
pātakam—sinful reactions; katham—why; na—shall not; jñeyam—know this;
asmābhiḥ—by us; pāpāt—from sins; asmāt—ourselves; nivartitum—to cease;
kula-kṣaya—the destruction of a dynasty; kṛtam—by so doing; doṣam—crime;
prapaśyadbhiḥ—by those who can see; janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa.

**TRANSLATION**

O Janārdana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing
one’s family or quarreling with friends, why should we, with knowledge of the
sin, engage in these acts?

**PURPORT**

A kṣatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so invited
by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could not refuse to fight
because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana. In this connection, Arjuna
considered that the other party might be blind to the effects of such a
challenge. Arjuna, however, could see the evil consequences and could not accept
the challenge. Obligation is actually binding when the effect is good, but when
the effect is otherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all these pros
and cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.

### 1.39


kula-kṣaye praṇaśyanti

kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ

dharme naṣṭe kulaṁ kṛtsnam

adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

kula-kṣaye—in destroying the family; praṇaśyanti—becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmāḥ—the family traditions; sanātanāḥ—eternal; dharme—in religion;
naṣṭe—being destroyed; kulam—family; kṛtsnam—wholesale; adharmaḥ—irreligious;
abhibhavati—transforms; uta—it is said.

**TRANSLATION**

With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished, and
thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligious practice.

**PURPORT**

In the system of the varṇāśrama institution there are many principles of
religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly and attain
spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such purifying processes
in the family, beginning from birth to death. But on the death of the elder
members, such family traditions of purification may stop, and the remaining
younger family members may develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their
chance for spiritual salvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder
members of the family be slain.

### 1.40


adharmābhibhavāt kṛṣṇa

praduṣyanti kula-striyaḥ

strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya

jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ

adharma—irreligion; abhibhavāt—having been predominant; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa;
praduṣyanti—become polluted; kula-striyaḥ—family ladies; strīṣu —of the
womanhood; duṣṭāsu—being so polluted; vārṣṇeya—O descendant of Vṛṣṇi; jāyate—it
so becomes; varṇa-saṅkaraḥ—unwanted progeny.

**TRANSLATION**

When irreligion is prominent in the family, O Kṛṣṇa, the women of the family
become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant of Vṛṣṇi,
comes unwanted progeny.

**PURPORT**

Good population in human society is the basic principle for peace, prosperity
and spiritual progress in life. The varṇāśrama religion’s principles were so
designed that the good population would prevail in society for the general
spiritual progress of state and community. Such population depends on the
chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood. As children are very prone to be
misled, women are similarly very prone to degradation. Therefore, both children
and women require protection by the elder members of the family. By being
engaged in various religious practices, women will not be misled into adultery.
According to Cāṇakya Paṇḍit, women are generally not very intelligent and
therefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions of religious
activities should always engage them, and thus their chastity and devotion will
give birth to a good population eligible for participating in the varṇāśrama
system. On the failure of such varṇāśrama-dharma, naturally the women become
free to act and mix with men, and thus adultery is indulged in at the risk of
unwanted population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in society, and
thus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war and pestilence.

### 1.41


saṅkaro narakāyaiva

kula-ghnānāṁ kulasya ca

patanti pitaro hy eṣāṁ

lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ

saṅkaraḥ—such unwanted children; narakāya—for hellish life; eva—certainly;
kula-ghnānām—of those who are killers of the family; kulasya—of the family;
ca—also; patanti—fall down; pitaraḥ—forefathers; hi—certainly; eṣām—of them;
lupta—stopped; piṇḍa—offerings; udaka—water; kriyāḥ—performance.

**TRANSLATION**

When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is created
both for the family and for those who destroy the family tradition. In such
corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations of food and water to the
ancestors.

**PURPORT**

According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is a need
to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of the family. This
offering is performed by worship of Viṣṇu, because eating the remnants of food
offered to Viṣṇu can deliver one from all kinds of sinful actions. Sometimes the
forefathers may be suffering from various types of sinful reactions, and
sometimes some of them cannot even acquire a gross material body and are forced
to remain in subtle bodies as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasādam food are
offered to forefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released from ghostly
or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers is a family
tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are required to perform such
rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional life is not required to perform
such actions. Simply by performing devotional service, one can deliver hundreds
and thousands of forefathers from all kinds of misery. It is stated in the
Bhāgavatam:

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛnāṁ pitṝṇāṁ na kiṅkaro nāyamṛṇī ca rājan sarvātmanā yaḥ
śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

“Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers.” (Bhāg. 11.5.41) Such
obligations are automatically fulfilled by performance of devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 1.42


doṣair etaiḥ kula-ghnānāṁ

varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ

utsādyante jāti-dharmāḥ

kula-dharmāś ca śāśvatāḥ

doṣaiḥ—by such faults; etaiḥ—all these; kula-ghnānām—of the destroyer of a
family; varṇa-saṅkara—unwanted children; kārakaiḥ—by the doers;
utsādyante—causes devastation; jāti-dharmāḥ—community project;
kula-dharmāḥ—family tradition; ca—also; śāśvatāḥ—eternal.

**TRANSLATION**

Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds of
community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.

**PURPORT**

The four orders of human society, combined with family welfare activities as
they are set forth by the institution of the sanātana-dharma or
varṇāśrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to attain his ultimate
salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanātana-dharma tradition by
irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaos in that society, and
consequently people forget the aim of life—Viṣṇu. Such leaders are called blind,
and persons who follow such leaders are sure to be led into chaos.

### 1.43


utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ

manuṣyāṇāṁ janārdana

narake niyataṁ vāso

bhavatīty anuśuśruma

utsanna—spoiled; kula-dharmāṇām—of those who have the family traditions;
manuṣyāṇām—of such men; janārdana—O Kṛṣṇa; narake—in hell; niyatam—always;
vāsaḥ—residence; bhavati—it so becomes; iti—thus; anuśuśruma—I have heard by
disciplic succession.

**TRANSLATION**

O Kṛṣṇa, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that
those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on what he has
heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving real knowledge. One
cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge without being helped by the
right person who is already established in that knowledge. There is a system in
the varṇāśrama institution by which one has to undergo the process of ablution
before death for his sinful activities. One who is always engaged in sinful
activities must utilize the process of ablution called the prāyaścitta. Without
doing so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo miserable
lives as the result of sinful activities.

### 1.44


aho bata mahat pāpaṁ

kartuṁ vyavasitā vayam

yad rājya-sukha-lobhena

hantuṁ sva-janam udyatāḥ

ahaḥ—alas; bata—how strange it is; mahat—great; pāpam—sins; kartum—to perform;
vyavasitāḥ—decided; vayam—we; yat—so that; rājya—kingdom; sukha-lobhena—driven
by greed for royal happiness; hantum—to kill; svajanam—kinsmen; udyatāḥ—trying
for.

**TRANSLATION**

Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts,
driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.

**PURPORT**

Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as the
killing of one’s own brother, father, or mother. There are many such instances
in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly devotee of the Lord, is
always conscious of moral principles and therefore takes care to avoid such
activities.

### 1.45


yadi mām apratīkāram

aśastraṁ śastra-pāṇayaḥ

dhārtarāṣṭrā raṇe hanyus

tan me kṣemataraṁ bhavet

yadi—even if; mām—unto me; apratīkāram—without being resistant; aśastram—without
being fully equipped; śastra-pāṇayaḥ—those with weapons in hand;
dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ—the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; raṇe—in the battlefield; hanyuḥ—may kill;
tat—that; me—mine; kṣemataram—better; bhavet—become.

**TRANSLATION**

I would consider it better for the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra to kill me unarmed and
unresisting, rather than fight with them.

**PURPORT**

It is the custom—according to kṣatriya fighting principles—that an unarmed and
unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, in such an enigmatic
position, decided he would not fight if he were attacked by the enemy. He did
not consider how much the other party was bent upon fighting. All these symptoms
are due to softheartedness resulting from his being a great devotee of the Lord.### 1.46


sañjaya uvāca

evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye

rathopastha upāviśat

visṛjya sa-śaraṁ cāpaṁ

śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

sañjayaḥ—Sañjaya; uvāca—said; evam—thus; uktvā—saying; arjunaḥ—Arjuna;
saṅkhye—in the battlefield; ratha—chariot; upasthaḥ—situated on; upāviśat—sat
down again; visṛjya—keeping aside; sa-śaram—along with arrows; cāpam—the bow;
śoka—lamentation; saṁvigna—distressed; mānasaḥ—within the mind.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow
and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief.

**PURPORT**

While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the chariot, but
he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down again, setting aside his
bow and arrows. Such a kind and softhearted person, in the devotional service of
the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of
Kurukṣetra.
