**The Divisions of Faith**

### 17.1


arjuna uvāca

ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa

sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; ye—those; śāstra-vidhim—the regulations of scripture;
utsṛjya—giving up; yajante—worships; śraddhayā—full faith; anvitāḥ—possessed of;
teṣām—of them; niṣṭhā—faith; tu—but; kā—what is that; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; sattvam—in
goodness; āho—said; rajaḥ—in passion; tamaḥ—in ignorance.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said, O Kṛṣṇa, what is the situation of one who does not follow the
principles of scripture but worships according to his own imagination? Is he in
goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

**PURPORT**

In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person faithful to
a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to the stage of
knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of peace and prosperity. In
the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that one who does not follow the
principles laid down in the scriptures is called an asura, demon, and one who
follows the scriptural injunctions faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now,
if one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna is to be cleared by
Kṛṣṇa. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and
placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness, passion or ignorance? Do such
persons attain the perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be
situated in real knowledge and elevate themselves to the highest perfectional
stage? Do those who do not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures
but who have faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain
success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Kṛṣṇa.

### 17.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā

dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā

sāttvikī rājasī caiva

tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidhā—three
kinds; bhavati—become; śraddhā—faith; dehinām—of the embodied; sā—that;
sva-bhāva-jā—according to his mode of material nature; sāttvikī—mode of
goodness; rājasī—mode of passion; ca—also; eva—certainly; tāmasī—mode of
ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus; tām—that; sṛṇu—hear from Me.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the embodied
soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds—goodness, passion or ignorance. Now hear
about these.

**PURPORT**

Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of laziness
or indolence, give up following these rules and regulations, are governed by the
modes of material nature. According to their previous activities in the modes of
goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature which is of a specific
quality. The association of the living entity with the different modes of nature
has been going on perpetually since the living entity is in contact with
material nature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to his
association with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if one
associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his rules and the
scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from ignorance to goodness,
or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is that blind faith in a particular
mode of nature cannot help a person become elevated to the perfectional stage.
One has to consider things carefully, with intelligence, in the association of a
bona fide spiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode of
nature.

### 17.3


sattvānurūpā sarvasya

śraddhā bhavati bhārata

śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo

yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ

sattva-anurūpā—according to the existence; sarvasya—of everyone; śraddhā—faith;
bhavati—becomes; bhārata—O son of Bhārata; śraddhā—faith; mayaḥ—full; ayam—this;
puruṣaḥ—living entity; yaḥ—anyone; yat—that; śraddhaḥ—faith; saḥ—that;
eva—certainly; saḥ—he.

**TRANSLATION**

According to one’s existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves a
particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith
according to the modes he has acquired.

**PURPORT**

Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But his faith
is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has
acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of faith, one associates with
certain persons. Now the real fact is that every living being, as is stated in
the Fifteenth Chapter, is originally the fragmental part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of
material nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature in
conditional life, he generates his own position by association with the
different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificial faith and
existence are only material. Although one may be conducted by some impression,
or some conception of life, still, originally, he is nirguṇa, or transcendental.
Therefore one has to become cleansed of the material contamination that he has
acquired in order to regain his relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the
only path back without fear: Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is situated in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the
perfectional stage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then
he is surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.

The word sattva, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sattva or faith
always comes out of the works of goodness. One’s faith may be in a demigod or
some created God or some mental concoction. It is supposed to be one’s strong
faith in something that is productive of the works of material goodness. But in
material conditional life, no works of material nature are completely purified.
They are mixed. They are not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental;
in purified goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As long as one’s faith is not completely in purified
goodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes of material
nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand to the heart. Therefore
according to the position of the heart in contact with a particular mode of
material nature, one’s faith is established. It should be understood, that if
one’s heart is in the mode of goodness, his faith is also in the mode of
goodness. If his heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode
of passion. And if his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is
also thus contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, and
there are different types of religions due to different types of faith. The real
principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure goodness, but
because the heart is tainted, we find different types of religious principles.
Thus according to different types of faith, there are different kinds of
worship.
### 17.4


yajante sāttvikā devān

yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ

pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye

yajante tāmasā janāḥ

yajante—worship; sāttvikāḥ—those who are in the mode of goodness;
devān—demigods; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ—those who are in the mode of passion
worship demons; pretān—dead spirits; bhūta-gaṇān—ghosts; ca anye—and others;
yajante—worship; tāmasāḥ—in the mode of ignorance; janāḥ—people.

**TRANSLATION**

Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of passion
worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts and
spirits.

**PURPORT**

In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different kinds of
worshipers according to their external activities. According to scriptural
injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshipable, but those
who are not very conversant with, or faithful to, the scriptural injunctions
worship different objects, according to their specific situations in the modes
of material nature. Those who are situated in goodness generally worship the
demigods. The demigods include Brahmā, Śiva and others such as Indra, Candra and
the sun-god. There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particular
demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the mode of
passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second World War, a man in
Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he had amassed a large
amount of wealth by dealing in the black market. Similarly, those in the modes
of passion and ignorance generally select a powerful man to be God. They think
that anyone can be worshiped as God and that the same results will be obtained.

Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of passion
worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of ignorance, in
darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some
dead man. Sexual service is also considered to be in the mode of darkness.
Similarly, in remote villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have
seen that in India the lower class people sometimes go to the forest, and if
they have knowledge that a ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and
offer sacrifices. These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship.
God worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure goodness.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, sattvaṁ viśuddham vāsudeva-śabditam. “When
a man is situated in pure goodness, he worships Vāsudeva.” The purport is that
those who are completely purified of the material modes of nature and who are
transcendentally situated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and they
worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal Viṣṇu, or Viṣṇu form
in the material world, which is known as philosophized Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is the
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the impersonalists, because
they do not ultimately believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine
that the Viṣṇu form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly,
they imagine that Lord Brahmā is the impersonal form in the material mode of
passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that are worshipable,
but because they think that the actual truth is impersonal Brahman, they dispose
of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end. In conclusion, the different
qualities of the material modes of nature can be purified through association
with persons who are of transcendental nature.

### 17.5-6


aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ

tapyante ye tapo janāḥ

dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ

kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ

karṣayantaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

bhūta-grāmam acetasaḥ

māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

tān viddhy āsura-niścayān

aśāstra—not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam—directed; ghoram—harmful to
others; tapyante—undergo penances; ye—those; tapaḥ—austerities; janāḥ—persons;
dambha—pride; ahaṅkāra—egotism; saṁyuktāḥ—engaged; kāma—lust; rāga—attachment;
bala—force; anvitāḥ—impelled by; karṣayantaḥ—tormenting; śarīra-stham—situated
within the body; bhūtagrāmam—combination of material elements; acetasaḥ—by such
a misled mentality; mām—to Me; ca—also; eva—certainly; antaḥ—within;
śarīra-stham—situated in the body; tān—them; viddhi—understand; āsura—demons;
niścayān—certainly.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the
scriptures, performing them out of pride, egotism, lust and attachment, who are
impelled by passion and who torture their bodily organs as well as the Supersoul
dwelling within are to be known as demons.

**PURPORT**

There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which are not
mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some ulterior
purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in the
scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual
advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to
such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gītā, certainly demoniac. Their acts
are against the scriptural injunction and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for
material enjoyment. By such activities, not only are the combination of material
elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such unauthorized fasting
or austerities for some political end are certainly very disturbing to others.
They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that
he can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this
method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not approved by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those who engage in them
are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to the Vedic scriptural
injunctions. The word acetasaḥ is significant in this connection—persons of
normal mental condition must obey the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not
in such a position neglect and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own
way of austerities and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of
the demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them
to take birth in the womb of demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by
demoniac principles life after life without knowing their relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough
to be guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic
wisdom, they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme
goal.

### 17.7


āhāras tv api sarvasya

tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ

yajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ

teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu

āhāraḥ—eating; tu—certainly; api—also; sarvasya—of everyone; trividhaḥ—three
kinds; bhavati—there are; priyaḥ—dear; yajñaḥ—sacrifice; tapaḥ—austerity;
tathā—also; dānam—charity; teṣām—of them; bhedam—differences; imam—thus;
śṛṇu—hear.

**TRANSLATION**

Even food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the three modes
of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity.
Listen, and I shall tell you of the distinctions of these.

**PURPORT**

In terms of different situations and the modes of material nature, there are
differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices, austerities and
charities. They are not all conducted on the same level. Those who can
understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of material
nature are actually wise; those who consider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or
charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are
missionary workers who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain
perfection. But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction
of the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people in
general.

### 17.8-10


āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-

sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ

rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā

āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ

kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇa-

tīkṣṇa-rūkṣa-vidāhinaḥ

āhārā rājasasyeṣṭā

duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ

yāta-yāmaṁ gata-rasaṁ

pūti paryuṣitaṁ ca yat

ucchiṣṭam api cāmedhyaṁ

bhojanaṁ tāmasa-priyam

**TRANSLATION**

Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one’s
existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such nourishing
foods are sweet, juicy, fattening and palatable. Foods that are too bitter, too
sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked by people in the modes of passion.
Such foods cause pain, distress, and disease. Food cooked more than three hours
before being eaten, which is tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean,
is food liked by people in the mode of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

Thc purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and aid
bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past, great authorities
selected those foods that best aid health and increase life’s duration, such as
milk products, sugar, rice, wheat, fruits and vegetables. These foods are very
dear to those in the mode of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and
molasses, while not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when
mixed with milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All these
foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable things like
meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth verse, have no
connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal fat is available in the
form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all foods. Milk, butter, cheese and
similar products give animal fat in a form which rules out any need for the
killing of innocent creatures. It is only through brute mentality that this
killing goes on. The civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk.
Slaughter is the way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split
peas, dhall, whole wheat, etc.

Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot or overly
mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucous in the stomach, leading
to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness are essentially those
that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than three hours before it is eaten
(except prasādam, food offered to the Lord) is considered to be in the mode of
darkness. Because they are decomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often
attracts people in this mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.

Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was first
offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly persons, especially the
spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of food are considered to be in the
mode of darkness, and they increase infection or disease. Such foodstuffs,
although very palatable to persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked
nor even touched by those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnant
of what is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā the
Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour and milk
when offered with devotion. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam. Of course, devotion and
love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts. But
it is also mentioned that the prasādam should be prepared in a particular way.
Any food prepared by the injunction of the scripture offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can be taken even if prepared long, long ago, because
such food is transcendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and
palatable for all persons, one should offer food to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

### 17.11


aphalākāṅkṣibhir yajño

vidhi-diṣṭo ya ijyate

yaṣṭavyam eveti manaḥ

samādhāya sa sāttvikaḥ

aphala-kāñkṣibhiḥ—devoid of desire for result; yajñaḥ—sacrifice;
vidhi—accordingly; dṛṣtaḥ—direction; yaḥ—anyone; ijyate—performs; yaṣṭavyam—must
be performed; eva—certainly; iti—thus; manaḥ—mind; samādhāya—fixed in; saḥ—he;
sāttvikaḥ—is in the mode of goodness.

**TRANSLATION**

Of sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to scriptural
rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the nature of goodness.

**PURPORT**

The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind, but here
it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any such desire. It
should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example, the performance of
rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they are performed with the purpose
of material benefit, but that is not in the mode of goodness. One should go to a
temple or church as a matter of duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and offer flowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use
in going to the temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is
not recommended in the scriptural injunction. One should go simply to offer
respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode of goodness. It is the
duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions of the scriptures and offer
respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
### 17.12


abhisandhāya tu phalaṁ

dambhārtham api caiva yat

ijyate bharata-śreṣṭha

taṁ yajñaṁ viddhi rājasam

abhisandhāya—desiring; tu—but; phalam—the result; dambha—pride; artham—material
benefits; api—also; ca—and; eva—certainly; yat—that which; ijyate—worship;
bharata-śreṣṭha—O chief of the Bhāratas; tam—that; yajñam—sacrifice;
viddhi—know; rājasam—in the mode of passion.

**TRANSLATION**

But that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or performed
ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, O chief of the
Bhāratas.

**PURPORT**

Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the heavenly
kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such sacrifices or
ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode of passion.

### 17.13


vidhi-hīnam asṛṣṭānnaṁ

mantra-hīnam adakṣiṇam

śraddhā-virahitaṁ yajñaṁ

tāmasaṁ paricakṣate

vidhi-hīnam—without scriptural direction; asṛṣṭa-annam—without distribution of
prasādam; mantra-hīnam—with no chanting of the Vedic hymns; adakṣiṇam—with no
remunerations to the priests; śraddhā—faith; virahitam—without;
yajñam—sacrifice; tāmasam—in the mode of ignorance; paricakṣate—is to be
considered.

**TRANSLATION**

And that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in which no
spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and no remunerations are
made to the priests, and which is faithless—that sacrifice is of the nature of
ignorance.

**PURPORT**

Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness. Sometimes
people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend the money for
recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial shows of
religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are all in the mode of darkness;
they produce a demoniac mentality and do not benefit human society.

### 17.14


deva-dvija-guru-prājña-

pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam

brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca

śārīraṁ tapa ucyate

deva—the Supreme Lord; dvija—the brāhmaṇa; guru—the spiritual master;
prājña—worshipable personalities; pūjanam—worship; śaucam—cleanliness;
ārjavam—simplicity; brahma-caryam—celibacy; ahiṁsā—nonviolence; ca—also;
śārīram—pertaining to the body; tapaḥ—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

The austerity of the body consists in this: worship of the Supreme Lord, the
brāhmaṇas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother.
Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence are also austerities of the
body.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and penance.
First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body. One should
offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the perfect,
qualified brāhmaṇas and the spiritual master and superiors like father, mother
or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should be given
proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and internally,
and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything
which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunction. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only in
marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are penances and
austerities as far as the body is concerned.

### 17.15


anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ

satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat

svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva

vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate

anudvega—not agitating; karam—producing; vākyam—words; satyam—truthful;
priya—dear; hitam—beneficial; ca—also; yat—which; svādhyāya—Vedic study;
abhyasanam—practice; ca—also; eva—certainly; vāṅmayaṁ—of the voice;
tapaḥ—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially and in
avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedas regularly.

**PURPORT**

One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of course,
when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his
students, but such a teacher should not speak to others who are not his students
if he will agitate their minds. This is penance as far as talking is concerned.
Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles,
one’s statements must be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from
scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such talk
should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive the
highest benefit and elevate human society. There is a limitless stock of Vedic
literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.


### 17.16


manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ

maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat

tapo mānasam ucyate

manaḥ-prasādaḥ—satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam—without duplicity towards
others; maunam—gravity; ātma—self; vinigrahaḥ—control; bhāva—nature;
saṁśuddhiḥ—purification; iti—thus; etat—that is; tapaḥ—austerity; mānasam—of the
mind; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And serenity, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of thought are the
austerities of the mind.

**PURPORT**

To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It should be
so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others. The best
training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratification. To purify one’s nature
is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by
taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of
sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age we
unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense gratification,
and so there is no possibility of the mind’s becoming satisfied. The best course
is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of satisfying
stories, as in the Purāṇas and the Mahābhārata. One can take advantage of this
knowledge and thus become purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and
one should think of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always
thinking of self-realization. The person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness observes perfect
silence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mind from sense
enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealing and thereby purify his
existence. All these qualities together constitute austerity in mental
activities.

### 17.17


śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ

tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ

aphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ

sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate

śraddhayā—with faith; parayā—transcendental; taptam—executed; tapaḥ—austerity;
tat—that; tri-vidham—three kinds; naraiḥ—by men; aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ—without
desires for fruits; yuktaiḥ—engaged; sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness;
pari-cakṣate—is called.

**TRANSLATION**

This threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature of goodness.

### 17.18


satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ

tapo dambhena caiva yat

kriyate tad iha proktaṁ

rājasaṁ calam adhruvam

satkāra—respect; māna—honor; pūjā-artham—for worship; tapaḥ—austerity;
dambhena—with pride; ca—also; eva—certainly; yat—which is; kriyate—performed;
tat—that; iha—in this world; proktam—is said; rājasam—in the mode of passion;
calam—flickering; adhruvam—temporary.

**TRANSLATION**

Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in order to gain
respect, honor and reverence are said to be in the mode of passion. They are
neither stable nor permanent.

**PURPORT**

Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive
honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of passion arrange
to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer riches.
Such arrangements artificially made by the performance of penances are
considered to be in the mode of passion. The results are temporary; they can be
continued for some time, but they are not permanent.

### 17.19


mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat

pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ

parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

mūḍha—foolish; grāheṇa—with endeavor; ātmanaḥ—of one’s own self; yat—which;
pīḍayā—by torture; kriyate—is performed; tapaḥ—penance; parasya—to others;
utsādanārtham—causing annihilation; vā—or; tat—that; tāmasam—in the mode of
darkness; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by means of
obstinant self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, are said to be in the
mode of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like Hiraṇyakaśipu,
who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill the demigods. He
prayed to Brahmā for such things, but ultimately he was killed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. To undergo penances for something which is impossible is
certainly in the mode of ignorance.

### 17.20


dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ

dīyate ’nupakāriṇe

deśe kāle ca pātre ca

tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam

dātavyam—worth giving; iti—thus; yat—that which; dānam—charity; dīyate—given;
anupakāriṇe—to any person irrespective of doing good; dese—in place; kāle—in
time; ca—also; pātre—suitable person; ca—and; tat—that; dānam—charity;
sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness; smṛtam—consider.

**TRANSLATION**

That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a worthy
person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be charity in the
mode of goodness.

**PURPORT**

In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving charity
indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always a consideration. Therefore
charity is recommended to be given at a place of pilgrimage and at lunar or
solar eclipses or at the end of the month or to a qualified brāhmaṇa or a
Vaiṣṇava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should be given without any
consideration of return. Charity to the poor is sometimes given out of
compassion, but if a poor man is not worth giving charity to, then there is no
spiritual advancement. In other words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended
in the Vedic literature.
### 17.21


yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ

phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ

dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ

tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

yat—that which; tu—but; prati-upakāra-artham—for the sake of getting some
return; phalam—result; uddiśya—desiring; vā—or; punaḥ—again; dīyate—is given in
charity; ca—also; parikliṣṭam—grudgingly; tat—that; dānam—charity; rājasam—in
the mode of passion; smṛtam—is understood to be.

**TRANSLATION**

But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire for
fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of
passion.

**PURPORT**

Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and
sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. “Why have I spent
so much in this way?” Charity is also sometimes made under some obligation, at
the request of a superior. These kinds of charity are said to be made in the
mode of passion.

There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to institutions
where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not recommended in the
Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is recommended.

### 17.22


adeśa-kāle yad dānam

apātrebhyaś ca dīyate

asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

adesa—unpurified place; kāle—unpurified time; yat—that which is; dānam—charity;
apātrebhyaḥ—to unworthy persons; ca—also; dīyate—is given; asatkṛtam—without
respect; avajñātam—without proper attention; tat—that; tāmasam—in the mode of
darkness; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And charity performed at an improper place and time and given to unworthy
persons without respect and with contempt is charity in the mode of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not encouraged
here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such charity is not
beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged. Similarly, if a person gives
charity to a suitable person without respect and without attention, that sort of
charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.

### 17.23


oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo

brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ

brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca

yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā

om—indication of the Supreme; tat—that; sat—eternal; iti—that;
nirdeśaḥ—indication; brāhmaṇāḥ—of the Supreme; tri-vidhaḥ—three kinds;
smṛtaḥ—consider; brahmaṇaḥ—the brāhmaṇas; tena—therefore; vedāḥ—the Vedic
literature; ca—also; yajñāḥ—sacrifice; ca—also; vihitāḥ—sacrifice;
purā—formerly.

**TRANSLATION**

From the beginning of creation, the three syllables—om tat sat—have been used to
indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were uttered by brāhmaṇas
while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices, for the satisfaction of the
Supreme.

**PURPORT**

It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided
into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. But whether
first class, second class or third class, they are all conditioned, contaminated
by the material modes of nature. When they are aimed at the Supreme—om tat sat,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal—they become means for spiritual
elevation. In the scriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These
three words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om is always found.

One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not attain
the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the ultimate end
of life. The conclusion is that the performance of charities, sacrifice and
penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the modes of passion
or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three words om tat sat
are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tad
viṣṇoḥ. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is uttered,
om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. These three words are
taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmaṇo nediṣṭaṁ nāma indicates the first
goal. Then tattvamasi indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya indicates
the third goal. Combined they become om tat sat. Formerly when Brahmā, the first
created living entity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplic
succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gītā recommends,
therefore, that any work done should be done for om tat sat, or for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. When one performs penance, charity, and sacrifice with
these three words, he is acting in Krṣna consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a
scientific execution of transcendental activities which enables one to return
home, back to Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a
transcendental way.

### 17.24


tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya

yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

pravartante vidhānoktāḥ

satataṁ brahma-vādinām

tasmāt—therefore; om—beginning with om; iti—thus; udāhṛtya—indicating;
yajña—sacrifice; dāna—charity; tapaḥ—penance; kriyāḥ—performances;
pravartante—begins; vidhāna-uktāḥ—according to scriptural regulation;
satatam—always; brahma-vādinām—of the transcendentalists.

**TRANSLATION**

Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and penances,
beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.

**PURPORT**

Om tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. The lotus feet of Viṣṇu are the supreme devotional
platform. The performance of everything on behalf of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.

### 17.25


tad ity anabhisandhāya

phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ

kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ

tat—that; iti—they; anabhisandhāya—without fruitive result; phalam—result of
sacrifice; yajña—sacrifice; tapaḥ—penance; kriyāḥ—activities; dāna—charity;
kriyāḥ—activities; ca—also; vividhāḥ—varieties; kriyante—done;
mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ—those who actually desire liberation.

**TRANSLATION**

One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose
of such transcendental activities is to get free from the material entanglement.

**PURPORT**

To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material
gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to the
spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.

### 17.26-27


sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca

sad ity etat prayujyate

praśaste karmaṇi tathā

sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate

yajñe tapasi dāne ca

sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate

karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ

sad ity evābhidhīyate

sat-bhāve—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sādhu-bhāve—in the sense of
the nature of devotion; ca—also; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; etat—this;
prayujyate—is used; praśaste—bona fide; karmaṇi—activities; tathā—also;
sat-śabdaḥ—sound; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yujyate—is used; yajñe—sacrifice;
tapasi—in penance; dāne—charity; ca—also; sthitiḥ—situated; sat—the Supreme;
iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—pronounced; karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly;
tat—that; arthīyam—are meant; sat—Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly;
abhidhīyate—is practiced.

**TRANSLATION**

The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is indicated
by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and of charity, true to
the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Pṛthā.

**PURPORT**

The words praśaste karmaṇi, or prescribed duties, indicate that there are many
activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes
beginning from parental care up to the end of one’s life. Such purificatory
processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all
such activities it is recommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words
sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation. One who is
acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious
of activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called svarūpa. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the
association of the devotees. Without good association, one cannot achieve
transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred
thread, one vibrates the words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yogic
performances, the supreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat
are used to perfect all activities. This supreme om tat sat makes everything
complete.

### 17.28


aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ

tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat

asad ity ucyate pārtha

na ca tat pretya no iha

aśraddhayā—without faith; hutam—performed; dattam—given; tapaḥ—penance;
taptam—executed; kṛtam—performed; ca—also; yat—that which; asat—falls; iti—thus;
ucyate—is said to be; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; na—never; ca—also; tat—that;
pretya—after death; no—nor; iha—in this life.

**TRANSLATION**

But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in the Supreme
are nonpermanent, O son of Pṛthā, regardless of whatever rites are performed.
They are called asat and are useless both in this life and the next.

**PURPORT**

Anything done without the transcendental objective—whether it be sacrifice,
charity or penance-is useless. Therefore, in this verse, it is declared that
such activities are abominable. Everything should be done for the Supreme in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper guidance, there
can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is
advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the
understanding of Kṛṣṇa. No one can obtain success without following this
principle. Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is
the way to make everything successful.

In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods, ghosts, or
Yakṣas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes of passion and
ignorance, but one who takes directly to Kṛṣṇa consciousness is transcendental
to all three modes of material nature. Although there is a process of gradual
elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes directly to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. To
achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritual master and
receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve faith in the Supreme.
When that faith matures, in course of time, it is called love of God. This love
is the ultimate goal of the living entities. One should, therefore, take to
Krṣṇa consciousness directly. That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.
