### 18.19


jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca

tridhaiva guṇa-bhedataḥ

procyate guṇa-saṅkhyāne

yathāvac chṛṇu tāny api

jñānam—knowledge; karma—work; ca—also; kartā—worker; ca—also; tridhā—three
kinds; eva—certainly; guṇa-bhedataḥ—in terms of different modes of material
nature; procyate—is said; guṇa-saṅkhyāne—in terms of different modes;
yathāvat—as they act; śṛṇu—hear; tāni—all of them; api—also.

TRANSLATION

In accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three kinds of
knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as I describe them.

PURPORT

In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material nature
were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the mode of
goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic, and the mode of
ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the modes of material nature
are binding; they are not sources of liberation. Even in the mode of goodness
one is conditioned. In the Seventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship
by different types of men in different modes of material nature were described.
In this verse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge,
workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.

### 18.20


sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ

bhāvam avyayam īkṣate

avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu

taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam

sarva-bhūteṣu—in all living entities; yena—by whom; ekam—one; bhāvam—situation;
avyayam—imperishable; īkṣate—does see; avibhaktam—undivided; vibhakteṣu—in the
numberless divided; tat—that; jñānam—knowledge; viddhi—knows; sāttvikam—in the
mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod,
human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the
mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although
they have different bodies in terms of their previous work. As described in the
Seventh Chapter, the manifestation of the living force in every body is due to
the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature,
that living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living
energy is imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference is
perceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of material
existence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided. Such
impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.

### 18.21


pṛthaktvena tu yaj jñānaṁ

nānā-bhāvān pṛthag-vidhān

vetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu

taj jñānaṁ viddhi rājasam

pṛthaktvena—because of division; tu—but; yat jñānam—which knowledge;
nānā-bhāvān—multifarious situations; pṛthak-vidhān—differently; vetti—one who
knows; sarveṣu—in all; bhūteṣu—living entities; tat jñānam—that knowledge;
viddhi—must be known; rājasam—in terms of passion.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be dwelling
in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with the
destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge
in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge, bodies differ from one
another because of the development of different types of consciousness,
otherwise there is no separate soul which manifests consciousness. The body is
itself the soul, and there is no separate soul beyond this body. According to
such knowledge, consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual
souls, but there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body there is no
special individual or Supreme Soul. All such conceptions are considered products
of the mode of passion.


### 18.22


yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin

kārye saktam ahaitukam

atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ ca

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

yat—that which; tu—but; kṛtsnavat—all in all; ekasmin—in one; kārye—work;
saktam—attached; ahaitukam—without cause; atattva-arthavat—without reality;
alpam ca—and very meager; tat—that; tāmasam—in the mode of darkness; udāhṛtam—is
spoken.

TRANSLATION

And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in
all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in
the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

The “knowledge” of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or ignorance
because every living entity in conditional life is born into the mode of
ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the authorities or
scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to the body. He is not
concerned about acting in terms of the directions of scripture. For him God is
money, and knowledge means the satisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge
has no connection with the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge
of the ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending and
mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode of darkness.
In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond this body is called
knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledge producing many theories and
doctrines by dint of mundane logic and mental speculation is the product of the
mode of passion, and knowledge concerned with only keeping the body comfortable
is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

### 18.23


niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam

arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam

aphala-prepsunā karma

yat tat sāttvikam ucyate

niyatam—regulative; saṅga-rahitam—without attachment; arāga-dveṣataḥ—without
love or hatred; kṛtam—done; aphala-prepsunā—without fruitive result; karma—acts;
yat—that which; tat—that; sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

As for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed without
attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renounced fruitive results, is
called action in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Regulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms of the
different orders and divisions of society, performed without attachment or
proprietary rights and therefore without any love or hatred and performed in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness for the satisfaction of the Supreme, without
self-satisfaction or self-gratification, are called actions in the mode of
goodness.

### 18.24


yat tu kāmepsunā karma

sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ

kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ

tad rājasam udāhṛtam

yat—that which; tu—but; kāma-īpsunā—with fruitive result; karma—work;
sāhaṅkāreṇa—with ego; vā—or; punaḥ—again; kriyate—performed; bahula-āyāsam—with
great labor; tat—that; rājasam—in the mode of passion; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires,
and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of
passion.

### 18.25


anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām

anapekṣya ca pauruṣam

mohād ārabhyate karma

yat tat tāmasam ucyate

anubandham—future bondage; kṣayam—distracted; hiṁsām—violence; anapekṣya—without
consideration of consequences; ca—also; pauruṣam—distressing to others; mohāt—by
illusion; ārabhyate—begun; karma—work; yat—that; tat—which; tāmasam—in the mode
of ignorance; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that action performed in ignorance and delusion without consideration of
future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injury and is impractical, is
said to be action in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

One has to give account of one’s actions to the state or to the agents of the
Supreme Lord called the Yamadūtas. Irresponsible work is distraction because it
destroys the regulative principles of scriptural injunction. It is often based
on violence and is distressing to other living entities. Such irresponsible work
is carried out in the light of one’s personal experience. This is called
illusion. And all such illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.

### 18.26


mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁ-vādī

dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ

siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ

kartā sāttvika ucyate

mukta-saṅgaḥ—liberated from all material association; anaham-vādī—without false
ego; dhṛti-utsāha—with great enthusiasm; samanvitaḥ—qualified in that way;
siddhi—perfection; asiddhyoḥ—failure; nirvikāraḥ—without change; kartā—worker;
sāttvikaḥ—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who is
enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success or failure, is a
worker in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is always transcendental to the material modes
of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the work entrusted to him
because he is above false ego and pride. Still, he is always enthusiastic till
the completion of such work. He does not worry about the distress undertaken; he
is always enthusiastic. He does not care for success or failure; he is equal
both in distress or happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of
goodness.

### 18.27


rāgī karma-phala-prepsur

lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ

harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā

rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

rāgī—very much attached; karma-phala—to the fruit of the work; prepsuḥ—desiring;
lubdhaḥ—greedy; hiṁsā-ātmakaḥ—and always envious; aśuciḥ—unclean;
harṣa-śoka-anvitaḥ—complicated, with joy and sorrow; kartā—such a worker;
rājasaḥ—in the mode of passion; parikīrtitaḥ—is declared.

TRANSLATION

But that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who passionately
wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure and moved by happiness
and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

A person is too much attached to certain kind of work or to the result because
he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and home, wife and
children. Such a person has no desire for higher elevation of life. He is simply
concerned with making this world as materially comfortable as possible. He is
generally very greedy, and he thinks that anything attained by him is permanent
and never to be lost. Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do
anything wrong for sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and
he does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happy if his
work is successful and very much distressed when his work is not successful.
Such is a man in the mode of passion.
