### 18.28


ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ

śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ

viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca

kartā tāmasa ucyate

ayuktaḥ—without reference to the scriptural injunctions; prākṛtaḥ—materialistic;
stabdhaḥ—obstinate; śaṭhaḥ—deceitful; naiṣkṛtikaḥ—expert in insulting others;
alasaḥ—lazy; viṣādī—morose; dīrgha-sūtrī—procrastinating; ca—also; kartā—worker;
tāmasaḥ—in the mode of ignorance; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunction of the
scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting
others, who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, is a worker in the mode
of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be performed and
what sort of work should not be performed. Those who do not care for those
injunctions engage in work not to be done, and such persons are generally
materialistic. They work according to the modes of nature, not according to the
injunctions of the scripture. Such workers are not very gentle, and generally
they are always cunning and expert in insulting others. They are very lazy; even
though they have some duty, they do not do it properly, and they put it aside to
be done later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They procrastinate;
anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years. Such workers are
situated in the mode of ignorance.

### 18.29


buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva

guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu

procyamānam aśeṣeṇa

pṛthaktvena dhanañjaya

buddheḥ—of intelligence; bhedam—differences; dhṛteḥ—of steadiness; ca—also;
eva—certainly; guṇataḥ—by the modes of material nature; tri-vidham—the three
kinds of; śṛṇu—just hear; procyamānam—as described by Me; aśeṣeṇa—in detail;
pṛthaktvena—differently; dhanañjaya—O winner of wealth.

**TRANSLATION**

Now, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the three
kinds of understanding and determination according to the three modes of nature.

**PURPORT**

Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower, in three
different divisions according to modes of material nature, the Lord is
explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker in the same way.

### 18.30


pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca

kāryākārye bhayābhaye

bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti

buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

pravṛttim—deserving; ca—also; nivṛttim—not deserving; kārya—work;
akārye—reaction; bhaya—fearful; abhaye—fearlessness; bandham—obligation; mokṣam
ca—and liberation; yā—that which; vetti—knows; buddhiḥ—understanding; sā—that;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī—in the mode of goodness.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and
what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared,
what is binding and what is liberating, that understanding is established in the
mode of goodness.

**PURPORT**

Actions which are performed in terms of the directions of the scriptures are
called pravṛtti, or actions that deserve to be performed, and actions which are
not so directed are not to be performed. One who does not know the scriptural
directions becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding
which discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.

### 18.31


yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca

kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca

ayathāvat prajānāti

buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī

yayā—by which; dharmam—principles of religion; adharmam ca—and irreligion;
kāryam—work; ca—also; akāryam—what ought not to be done; eva—certainly; ca—also;
ayathāvat—not perfectly; prajānati—knows; buddhiḥ—intelligence; sā—that;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; rājasī—in the mode of passion.

**TRANSLATION**

And that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious way of
life and the irreligious, between action that should be done and action that
should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son of Pṛthā, is in the mode
of passion.

**PURPORT**

Intelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It accepts
religions which are not actually religions and rejects actual religion. All
views and activities are misguided. Men of passionate intelligence understand a
great soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul. They
think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In all activities they
simply take the wrong path; therefore their intelligence is in the mode of
passion.

### 18.32


adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā

manyate tamasāvṛtā

sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca

buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

adharmam—irreligion; dharmam—religion; iti—thus; yā—which; manyate—thinks;
tamasā—by illusion; āvṛtā—covered; sarva-arthān—all things; viparītān—the wrong
direction; ca—also; buddhiḥ—intelligence; sa—that; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
tāmasī—the mode of ignorance.

**TRANSLATION**

That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to be
irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the
wrong direction, O Pārtha, is in the mode of ignorance.

### 18.33


dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate

manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ

yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā

dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī

dhṛtyā—determination; yayā—by which; dhārayate—is sustained; manaḥ—mind;
prāṇa—life; indriya—senses; kriyāḥ—activities; yogena—by yoga practice;
avyabhicāriṇyā—without any break; dhṛtiḥ—such determination; sā—that; pārtha—O
son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī—in the mode of goodness.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained with
steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls the mind, life, and the acts
of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.

**PURPORT**

Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily fixed in the
Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one’s mind, life and sensual
activities on the Supreme, engages in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That sort of
determination is in the mode of goodness. The word avyabhicāriṇya is very
significant, for it refers to persons who are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and
are never deviated by any other activity.

### 18.34


yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān

dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna

prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī

dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī

yayā—by which; tu—but; dharma-kāma-arthān—for religiosity and economic
development; dhṛtyā—by determination; dhārayate—in such terms; arjuna—O Arjuna;
prasaṅgena—for that; phala-ākāṅkṣī—desiring fruitive result;
dhṛtiḥ—determination; sā—that; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; rājasī—in the mode of
passion.

**TRANSLATION**

And that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive result in religion,
economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O
Arjuna.

**PURPORT**

Any person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or economic
activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and whose mind, life and
senses are thus engaged, is in the mode of passion.

### 18.35


yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ

viṣādaṁ madam eva ca

na vimuñcati durmedhā

dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī

yayā—by which; svapnam—dream; bhayam—fearfulness; śokam—lamentation;
viṣādam—moroseness; madam—illusion; eva—certainly; ca—also; na—never;
vimuñcati—is liberated; durmedhāḥ—unintelligent; dhṛtiḥ—determination; sā—that;
pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; tāmasī—in the mode of ignorance.

**TRANSLATION**

And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness, and illusion—such unintelligent determination is in the
mode of darkness.

**PURPORT**

It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does not dream.
Here dream means too much sleep. Dream is always present; either in the mode of
goodness, passion or ignorance, dream is a natural occurrence. But those who
cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot avoid the pride of enjoying material
objects and who are always dreaming of lording it over the material world, whose
life, mind, and senses are thus engaged, are considered to be in the mode of
ignorance.

### 18.36-37


sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ

śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha

abhyāsād ramate yatra

duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati

yat tad agre viṣam iva

pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam

tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam

ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam

sukham—happiness; tu—but; idānīm—now; tri-vidham—three kinds; śṛṇu—hear; me—from
Me; bharatarṣabha—O best amongst the Bhāratas; abhyāsāt—by practice;
ramate—enjoyer; yatra—where; duḥkha—distress; antam—end; ca—also;
nigacchati—gains; yat—that which; tat—that; agre—in the beginning; viṣam
iva—like poison; pariṇāme—at the end; amṛta—nectar; upamam—compared to;
tat—that; sukham—happiness; sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness; proktam—is said;
ātma—self; buddhi—intelligence; prasāda-jam—satisfactory.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Bhāratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of
happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes comes to
the end of all distress. That which in the beginning may be just like poison but
at the end is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said
to be happiness in the mode of goodness.

**PURPORT**

A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again. Thus he
chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of such enjoyment, he becomes
relieved from material entanglement by association with a great soul. In other
words, a conditioned soul is always engaged in some type of sense gratification,
but when he understands by good association that it is only a repetition of the
same thing, and he is awakened to his real Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is sometimes
relieved from such repetitive so-called happiness.

In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and regulations
to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the mind on the Self. All
these procedures are very difficult, bitter like poison, but if one is
successful in following the regulations and comes to the transcendental
position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he enjoys life.
