### 18.38


viṣayendriya-saṁyogād

yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam

pariṇāme viṣam iva

tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

viṣaya—objects of sense; indriya—senses; saṁyogāt—combination; yat—that;
tat—which; agre—in the beginning; amṛta-upamam—just like nectar; pariṇāme—at the
end; viṣam iva—like poison; tat—that; sukham—happiness; rājasam—in the mode of
passion; smṛtam—is considered.

**TRANSLATION**

That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects
and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of
the nature of passion.

**PURPORT**

A young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young man to see
her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the beginning this may be
very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or after some time, it becomes just
like poison. They are separated or there is divorce, there is lamentation, there
is sorrow, etc. Such happiness is always in the mode of passion. Happiness
derived from a combination of the senses and the sense objects is always a cause
of distress and should be avoided by all means.

### 18.39


yad agre cānubandhe ca

sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥ

nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

yat—that which; agre—in the beginning; ca—also; anubandhe—by binding; ca—also;
sukham—happiness; mohanam—illusion; ātmanaḥ—of the self; nidrā—sleeping;
ālasya—laziness; pramāda—illusion; uttham—produced of; tat—that; tāmasam—in the
mode of ignorance; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from
beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to
be of the nature of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the mode of
darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act is also in the
mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of ignorance, everything is
illusion. There is no happiness either in the beginning or the end. For the
person in the mode of passion there might be some kind of ephemeral happiness in
the beginning and at the end distress, but for the person in the mode of
ignorance there is only distress both in the beginning and at the end.

### 18.40


na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā

divi deveṣu vā punaḥ

sattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ

yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ

na—not; tat—that; asti—there is; pṛthivyām—within the universe; vā—or; divi—in
the higher planetary system; deveṣu—amongst the demigods; vā—or; punaḥ—again;
sattvam—existence; prakṛti-jaiḥ—under the influence of material nature;
muktam—liberated; yat—that; ebhiḥ—by this; syāt—so becomes; tribhiḥ—by three;
guṇaiḥ—modes of material nature.

**TRANSLATION**

There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher
planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes of material nature.

**PURPORT**

The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of material
nature all over the universe.

### 18.41


brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ

śūdrāṇāṁ ca parantapa

karmāṇi pravibhaktāni

svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ

brāhmaṇa—the brāhmaṇas; kṣatriya—the kṣatriyas; viśām—the vaiśyas; śūdrāṇām—the
śūdras; ca—and; parantapa—O subduer of the enemies; karmāṇi—activities;
pravibhaktāni—are divided; svabhāva—own nature; prabhavaiḥ—born of; guṇaiḥ—by
the modes of material nature.

**TRANSLATION**

Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras are distinguished by their qualities of
work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with the modes of nature.

### 18.42


śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca

jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ

brahma-karma svabhāva-jam

śamaḥ—peacefulness; damaḥ—self-control; tapaḥ—austerity; śaucam—purity;
kṣāntiḥ—tolerance; ārjavam—honesty; eva—certainly; ca—and; jñānam—wisdom;
vijñānam—knowledge; āstikyam—religiousness; brahma—of a brāhmaṇa; karma—duty;
svabhāva-jam—born of his own nature.

**TRANSLATION**

Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom,
knowledge, and religiousness—these are the qualities by which the brāhmaṇas
work.

### 18.43


śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ

yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam

dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca

kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam

śauryam—heroism; tejaḥ—power; dhṛtiḥ—determination; dākṣyam—resourcefulness;
yuddhe—in battle; ca—and; api—also; apalāyanam—not fleeing; dānam—generosity;
īśvara—leadership; bhāvaḥ—nature; ca—and kṣātram—kṣatriya; karma—duty;
svabhāva-jam—born of his own nature.

**TRANSLATION**

Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle, generosity,
and leadership are the qualities of work for the kṣatriyas.

### 18.44


kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ

vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam

paricaryātmakaṁ karma

śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam

kṛṣi—ploughing; go—cows; rakṣya—protection; vāṇijyam—trade; vaiśya—vaiśya;
karma—duty; svabhāva-jam—born of his own nature; paricaryā—service;
ātmakam—nature; karma—duty; śūdrasya—of the śūdra; api—also; svabhāva-jam—born
of his own nature.

**TRANSLATION**

Farming, cattle raising and business are the qualities of work for the vaiśyas,
and for the śūdras there is labor and service to others.

### 18.45


sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ

sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ

yathā vindati tac chṛṇu

sve—own; sve—own; karmaṇi—in work; abhirataḥ—following; saṁsiddhim—perfection;
labhate—achieves; naraḥ—a man; svakarma—by his own duty; nirataḥ—engaged;
siddhim—perfection; yathā—as; vindati—attains, tat—that; śṛṇu—listen.

**TRANSLATION**

By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now please
hear from Me how this can be done.

### 18.46


yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya

siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

yataḥ—from whom; pravṛttiḥ—emanation; bhūtānām—of all living entities; yena—by
whom; sarvam—all; idam—this; tatam—is pervaded; svakarmaṇā—in his own duties;
tam—Him; abhyarcya—by worshiping; siddhim—perfection; vindati—achieves;
mānavaḥ—a man.

**TRANSLATION**

By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is
all-pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain perfection.

**PURPORT**

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental parts and
parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such, the Supreme Lord is the beginning of all
living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedānta-sūtra—janmādy asya yataḥ. The
Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning of life of every living entity. And the
Supreme Lord, by His two energies, His external energy and internal energy, is
all-pervading. Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies.
Generally the Vaiṣṇava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His internal
energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of the internal energy.
The external energy is a background, but the Supreme Lord by the expansion of
His plenary portion as Paramātmā is situated everywhere. He is the Supersoul of
all demigods, all human beings, all animals, everywhere. One should therefore
know that as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord it is his duty to render
service unto the Supreme. Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to
the Lord in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is recommended in this verse.

Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation by
Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses. And, by the result of the work in which one
is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, should be worshiped.
If one thinks always in this way, in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then, by the
grace of the Lord, he becomes fully aware of everything. That is the perfection
of life. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā, teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā. The Supreme
Lord Himself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest
perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he serves the
Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.

### 18.47


śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ

para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt

svabhāva-niyataṁ karma

kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam

sreyān—better; sva-dharmaḥ—one’s own occupation; viguṇaḥ—imperfectly performed;
para-dharmāt—another’s occupation; svanuṣṭhitāt—perfectly done;
svabhāva-niyatam—prescribed duties according to one’s nature; karma—work;
kurvan—performing; na—never; āpnoti—achieve; kilbiṣam—sinful reactions.

**TRANSLATION**

It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform it
imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly.
Prescribed duties, according to one’s nature, are never affected by sinful
reactions.

**PURPORT**

One’s occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gītā. As already discussed in
previous verses, the duties of a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra are
prescribed according to the particular modes of nature. One should not imitate
another’s duty. Aman who is by nature attracted to the kind of work done by
śūdras should not artificially claim himself to be a brāhmaṇa, although he may
be born into a brāhmaṇa family. In this way one should work according to his own
nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of the Supreme Lord.
The occupational duty of a brāhmaṇa is certainly in the mode of goodness, but if
a person is not by nature in the mode of goodness, he should not imitate the
occupational duty of a brāhmaṇa. For a kṣatriya, or administrator, there are so
many abominable things; a kṣatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and
sometimes a kṣatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence
and duplicity accompany political affairs, but a kṣatriya is not supposed to
give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of a brāhmaṇa.

One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a kṣatriya.
He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such fighting is performed
for the sake of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there need be no fear
of degradation. In the business field also, sometimes a merchant has to tell so
many lies to make a profit. If he does not do so, there can be no profit.
Sometimes a merchant says, “Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no
profit,” but one should know that without profit the merchant cannot exist.
Therefore it should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is not
making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he is engaged in
an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he should give up his
profession and pursue the profession of a brāhmaṇa. That is not recommended.
Whether one is a kṣatriya, a vaiśya, or a śūdra doesn’t matter, if he serves, by
his work, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even brāhmaṇas, who perform
different types of sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes
animals are sacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a kṣatriya engaged in
his own occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the Third
Chapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained; every man
should work for the purpose of yajña, or for Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Anything done for personal sense gratification is a cause of bondage.
The conclusion is that everyone should be engaged according to the particular
mode of nature he has acquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the
supreme cause of the Supreme Lord.
