### 18.70


adhyeṣyate ca ya imaṁ

dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ

jñāna-yajñena tenāham

iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ

adhyeṣyate—will study; ca—also; yaḥ—he; imam—this; dharmyaṁ—sacred;
saṁvādam—conversation; āvayoḥ—of ours; jñāna—knowledge; yajñena—by sacrifice;
tena—by him; aham—I; iṣṭaḥ—worshiped; syām—shall be; iti—thus; me—My;
matiḥ—opinion.

TRANSLATION

And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me by his
intelligence.

### 18.71


śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca

śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥ

so ’pi muktaḥ śubhāl lokān

prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām

sraddhāvan—faithful; anasūyaḥ ca—and not envious; śṛṇuyāt—does hear;
api—certainly; yaḥ—who; naraḥ—man; saḥ api—he also; muktaḥ—being liberated;
śubhān—auspicious; lokān—planets; prāpnuyāt—attains; puṇya-karmaṇām—of the past.

TRANSLATION

And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful
reaction and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.

PURPORT

In the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the Gītā’s being
spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In other words, Bhagavad-gītā is
for the devotees only, but it so happens that sometimes a devotee of the Lord
will hold open class, and in that class all the students are not expected to be
devotees. Why do such persons hold open class? It is explained here that
although everyone is not a devotee, still there are many men who are not envious
of Kṛṣṇa. They have faith in Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If such
persons hear from a bona fide devotee about the Lord, the result is that they
become at once free from all sinful reactions and after that attain to the
planetary system where all righteous persons are situated. Therefore simply by
hearing Bhagavad-gītā, even a person who does not try to be a pure devotee
attains the result of righteous activities. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord
gives everyone a chance to become free from all sinful reactions and to become a
devotee of the Lord.

Generally those who are free from sinful reaction are righteous. Such persons
very easily take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The word puṇya-karmaṇām is very
significant here. This refers to the performance of great sacrifice. Those who
are righteous in performing devotional service but who are not pure can attain
the planetary system of the polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Mahārāja is
presiding. He is a great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet which
is called the polestar.

### 18.72


kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha

tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā

kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ

praṇaṣṭas te dhanañjaya

kaccit—whether; etat—this; śrutam—heard; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; tvayā—by you;
ekāgreṇa—with full attention; cetasā—by the mind; kaccit—whether;
ajñāna—ignorant; saṁmohaḥ—illusion; praṇaṣṭaḥ—dispelled; te—of you; dhanañjaya—O
conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).

TRANSLATION

O conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with your mind?
And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?

PURPORT

The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was His duty
to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole Bhagavad-gītā in its
proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to re-explain any point, or the
whole Bhagavad-gītā if so required. Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gītā
from a bona fide spiritual master like Kṛṣṇa or His representative will find
that all his ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gītā is not an ordinary book
written by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachings from
Kṛṣṇa or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure to become a
liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.

### 18.73


arjuna uvāca

naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā

tvat-prasādān mayācyuta

sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ

kariṣye vacanaṁ tava

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; naṣṭaḥ—dispelled; mohaḥ—illusion; smṛtiḥ—memory;
labdhā—regained; tvat-prasādāt—by Your mercy; mayā—by me; acyuta—O infallible
Kṛṣṇa; sthitaḥ—situated; asmi—I am; gata—removed; sandehaḥ—all doubts; kariṣye—I
shall execute; vacanam—order; tava—Your.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said, My dear Kṛṣṇa, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I have
regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and free from doubt and am
prepared to act according to Your instructions.

PURPORT

The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna, is that
he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He is meant for
self-discipline. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that the actual position of the
living entity is that of eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. Forgetting this
principle, the living entity becomes conditioned by material nature, but in
serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes the liberated servant of God. The living
entity’s constitutional position is to be servitor; he either has to serve the
illusory māyā or the Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his
normal condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy, then
certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is serving in
this material world. He is bound by his lust and desires, yet he thinks of
himself as the master of the world. This is called illusion. When a person is
liberated, his illusion is over, and he voluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme
to act according to His desires. The last illusion, the last snare of māyā to
trap the living entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity
thinks that he is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is so unintelligent
that he does not think that if he were God, then how could he be in doubt? That
he does not consider. So that is the last snare of illusion. Actually to become
free from the illusory energy is to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and agree to act according to His order. The word mohaḥ is very
important in this verse. Mohaḥ refers to that which is opposed to knowledge.
Actually real knowledge is the understanding that every living being is
eternally servitor of the Lord, but instead of thinking oneself in that
position, the living entity thinks that he is not servant, that he is the master
of this material world, for he wants to lord it over the material nature. That
is his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the Lord or by
the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, one agrees to act in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Kṛṣṇa consciousness is acting according to Kṛṣṇa’s order. A conditioned soul
illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that the Supreme Lord
is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the proprietor of everything.
Whatever He desires He can bestow upon His devotees; He is the friend of
everyone, and He is especially inclined to His devotee. He is the controller of
this material nature and of all living entities. He is also the controller of
inexhaustible time, and He is full of all opulences and all potencies. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead can even give Himself to the devotee. One who
does not know Him is under the spell of illusion; he does not become a devotee,
but a servitor of māyā. Arjuna, however, after hearing Bhagavad-gītā from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all illusion. He could
understand that Kṛṣṇa was not only his friend, but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And he understood Kṛṣṇa factually. So to study Bhagavad-gītā is to
understand Kṛṣṇa factually. When a person is in full knowledge, he naturally
surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. When Arjuna understood that it was Kṛṣṇa’s plan to reduce
the unnecessary increase of population, he agreed to fight according to Kṛṣṇa’s
desire. He again took up his weapons—his arrows and bow—to fight under the order
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 18.74


sañjaya uvāca

ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya

pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ

saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam

adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; iti—thus; aham—I; vāsudevasya—of Kṛṣṇa;
pārthasya—of Arjuna; ca—also; mahātmanaḥ—two great souls; saṁvādam—discussing;
imam—this; aśrauṣam—heard; adbhutam—wonder; romaharṣaṇam—hair standing on end.

TRANSLATION

Sañjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kṛṣṇa and
Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā, Dhṛtarāṣṭra inquired from his secretary
Sañjaya, “What happened in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra?” The entire study was
related to the heart of Sañjaya by the grace of his spiritual master, Vyāsa. He
thus explained the theme of the battlefield. The conversation was wonderful
because such an important conversation between two great souls never took place
before and would not take place again. It is wonderful because the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is speaking about Himself and His energies to the living
entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in the footsteps of
Arjuna to understand Kṛṣṇa, then our life will be happy and successful. Sañjaya
realized this, and as he began to understand it, he related the conversation to
Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Now it is concluded that wherever there is Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, there
is victory.

### 18.75


vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān

etad guhyam ahaṁ param

yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt

sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam

vyāsa-prasādāt—by the mercy of Vyāsadeva; śrutavān—heard; etat—this;
guhyam—confidential; aham—I; param—the supreme; yogam—mysticism; yogeśvarāt—from
the master of all mysticism; kṛṣṇāt—from Kṛṣn.a; sākṣāt—directly;
kathayataḥ—speaking; svayam—personally.

TRANSLATION

By the mercy of Vyāsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly from
the master of all mysticism, Kṛṣṇa, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.

PURPORT

Vyāsa was the spiritual master of Sañjaya, and Sañjaya admits that it was by his
mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This means
that one has to understand Kṛṣṇa not directly but through the medium of the
spiritual master. The spiritual master is the transparent medium, although it is
true that the experience is direct. This is the mystery of the disciplic
succession. When the spiritual master is bona fide, then one can hear
Bhagavad-gītā directly, as Arjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogīs all
over the world, but Kṛṣṇa is the master of all yoga systems. Kṛṣṇa’s instruction
is explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gītā—surrender unto Krṣṇa. One who does so is
the topmost yogī. This is confirmed in the last verse of the Sixth Chapter.
Yoginām api sarveṣām.

Nārada is the direct disciple of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master of Vyāsa.
Therefore Vyāsa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in the disciplic
succession, and Sañjaya is the direct disciple of Vyāsa. Therefore by the grace
of Vyāsa, his senses were purified, and he could see and hear Kṛṣṇa directly.
One who directly hears Kṛṣṇa can understand this confidential knowledge. If one
does not come to the disciplic succession, he cannot hear Kṛṣṇa; therefore his
knowledge is always imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gītā is
concerned.

In Bhagavad-gītā, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga,
are explained. Kṛṣṇa is the master of all such mysticism. It is to be
understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to understand Kṛṣṇa
directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyāsa, Sañjaya was also able to hear Kṛṣṇa
directly. Actually there is no difference in hearing directly from Kṛṣṇa or
hearing directly from Kṛṣṇa via a bona fide spiritual master like Vyāsa. The
spiritual master is the representative of Vyāsadeva also. According to the Vedic
system, on the birthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the
ceremony called Vyāsa-pūjā.

### 18.76


rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya

saṁvādam imam adbhutam

keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ

hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ

rājan—O King; saṁsmṛtya—remembering; saṁsmṛtya—remembering; saṁvādam—message;
imam—this; adbhutam—wonderful; keśava—Lord Kṛṣṇa; arjunayoḥ—and Arjuna;
puṇyam—pious; hṛṣyāmi—taking pleasure; ca—also; muhuḥ muhuḥ—always, repeatedly.

TRANSLATION

O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and
Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

PURPORT

The understanding of Bhagavad-gītā is so transcendental that anyone who becomes
conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa becomes righteous, and he cannot
forget such talks. This is the transcendental position of spiritual life. In
other words, one who hears the Gītā from the right source, directly from Kṛṣṇa,
attains full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The result of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that one
becomes increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not only for
some time, but at every moment.
