Conclusion—The Perfection of Renunciation

### 18.1


arjuna uvāca

sannyāsasya mahā-bāho

tattvam icchāmi veditum

tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa

pṛthak keśī-niṣūdana

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; sannyāsasya—renunciation; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed
one; tattvam—truth; icchāmi—I wish; veditum—to understand; tyāgasya—of
renunciation; ca—also; hṛṣīkeśa—O master of the senses; pṛthak—differently;
keśi-nisūdana—O killer of the Keśī demon.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyāga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyāsa], O killer of
the Keśī demon, Hṛṣīkeśa.

**PURPORT**

Actually the Bhagavad-gītā is finished in seventeen chapters. The Eighteenth
Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics discussed before. In
every chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, Lord Kṛṣṇa stresses that devotional service unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life. This same point
is summarized in the Eighteenth Chapter as the most confidential path of
knowledge. In the first six chapters, stress was given to devotional service:
yoginām api sarveṣām… “Of all yogīs or transcendentalists, one who always thinks
of Me within himself is best.” In the next six chapters, pure devotional service
and its nature and activity were discussed. In the third six chapters,
knowledge, renunciation, the activities of material nature and transcendental
nature, and devotional service were described. It was concluded that all acts
should be performed in conjunction with the Supreme Lord, summarized by the
words om tat sat, which indicate Viṣṇu, the Supreme Person. In the third part of
Bhagavad-gītā, devotional service was established by the example of past ācāryas

and the Brahma-sūtra, the Vedānta-sūtra, which cites that devotional service is
the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else. Certain impersonalists consider
themselves monopolizers of the knowledge of Vedānta-sūtra, but actually the
Vedānta-sūtra is meant for understanding devotional service, for the Lord
Himself is the composer of the Vedānta-sūtra, and He is its knower. That is
described in the Fifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every Veda, devotional
service is the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā.

As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter was described,
similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of all instruction is
given. The purpose of life is indicated to be renunciation and attainment of the
transcendental position above the three material modes of nature. Arjuna wants
to clarify the two distinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gītā, namely
renunciation (tyāga) and the renounced order of life (sannyāsa). Thus he is
asking the meaning of these two words.

Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord—Hṛṣīkeśa and
Keśinisūdana—are significant. Hṛṣīkeśa is Kṛṣṇa, the master of all senses, who
can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests Him to summarize
everything in such a way that he can remain equiposed. Yet he has some doubts,
and doubts are always compared to demons. He therefore addresses Kṛṣṇa as
Keśinisūdana. Keśī was a most formidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now
Arjuna is expecting Kṛṣṇa to kill the demon of doubt.

### 18.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ

sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ

sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ

prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kāmyānām—with
desire; karmaṇām—activities; nyāsam—renunciation; sannyāsam—renounced order of
life; kavayaḥ—the learned; viduḥ—know; sarva—all; karma—activities; phala—of
results; tyāgam—renunciation; prāhuḥ—call; tyāgam—renunciation; vicakṣaṇāḥ—the
experienced.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Lord said, To give up the results of all activities is called
renunciation [tyāga] by the wise. And that state is called the renounced order
of life [sannyāsa] by great learned men.

**PURPORT**

The performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is the
instruction of Bhagavad-gītā. But activities leading to advanced spiritual
knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in the next verse.
There are many prescriptions of methods for performing sacrifice for some
particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. There are certain sacrifices to
perform to attain a good son or to attain elevation to the higher planets, but
sacrifices prompted by desires should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the
purification of one’s heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should
not be given up.

### 18.3


tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke

karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ

yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyam iti cāpare

tyājyam—must be given up; doṣavat—as an evil; iti—thus; eke—one group;
karma—work; prāhuḥ—said; manīṣiṇaḥ—of great thinkers; yajña—sacrifice;
dāna—charity; tapaḥ—penance; karma—work; na—never; tyājyam—is to be given up;
iti—thus; ca—certainly; apare—others.

**TRANSLATION**

Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given
up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity
and penance should never be abandoned.

**PURPORT**

There are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects of
contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in a
sacrifice, yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable. Although
animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal
is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is to give a new life to the
animal. Sometimes the animal is given a new animal life after being killed in
the sacrifice, and sometimes the animal is promoted immediately to the human
form of life. But there are different opinions among the sages. Some say that
animal killing should always be avoided, and others say that for a specific
sacrifice it is good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are
now being clarified by the Lord Himself.

### 18.4


niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra

tyāge bharata-sattama

tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra

tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ

niścayam—certainly; śṛṇu—hear; me—from Me; tatra—there; tyāge—in the matter of
renunciation; bharata-sattama—O best of the Bhāratas; tyāgaḥ—renunciation;
hi—certainly; puruṣa-vyāghra—O tiger among human beings; tri-vidhaḥ—three kinds;
samprakīrtitaḥ—is declared.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Bhāratas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger among men,
there are three kinds of renunciation declared in the scriptures.

**PURPORT**

Although there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, gives His judgment, which should be taken as
final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given by the Lord. Here the Lord
is personally present, and His word should be taken as final. The Lord says that
the process of renunciation should be considered in terms of the modes of
material nature in which they are performed.

### 18.5


yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat

yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva

pāvanāni manīṣiṇām

yajña—sacrifice; dāna—charity; tapaḥ—penance; karma—activities; na—never;
tyājyam—to be given up; kāryam—must be done; eva—certainly; tat—that;
yajñaḥ—sacrifice; dānam—charity; tapaḥ—penance; ca—also; eva—certainly;
pāvanāni—purifying; manīṣiṇām—even of the great souls.

**TRANSLATION**

Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.

**PURPORT**

The yogīs should perform acts for the advancement of human society. There are
many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to spiritual life. The
marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to be one of these sacrifices. It
is called vivāha-yajña. Should a sannyāsī, who is in the renounced order of life
and who has given up his family relations, encourage the marriage ceremony? The
Lord says here that any sacrifice which is meant for human welfare should never
be given up. Vivāha-yajña, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the human
mind to become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, this
vivāha-yajña should be encouraged even by persons in the renounced order of
life. Sannyasīs should never associate with women, but that does not mean that
one who is in the lower stages of life, a young man, should not accept a wife in
the marriage ceremony. All prescribed sacrifices are meant for achieving the
Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the lower stages, they should not be given up.
Similarly, charity is for the purification of the heart. If charity is given to
suitable persons, as described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual
life.

### 18.6


etāny api tu karmāṇi

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca

kartavyānīti me pārtha

niścitaṁ matam uttamam

etāni—all this; api—certainly; tu—must; karmāṇi—activities; saṅgam—association;
tyaktvā—renouncing; phalāni—results; ca—also; kartavyāni—as duty; iti—thus;
me—My; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; niścitam—definite; matam—opinion; uttamam—the
best.

**TRANSLATION**

All these activities should be performed without any expectation of result. They
should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Pṛthā. That is My final
opinion.

**PURPORT**

Although all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result by such
performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant for material
advancement in life should be given up, but sacrifices that purify one’s
existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane should not be stopped.
Everything that leads to Kṛṣṇa consciousness must be encouraged. In the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also it is said that any activity which leads to devotional
service to the Lord should be accepted. That is the highest criterion of
religion. A devotee of the Lord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice, or
charity which will help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord

### 18.7


niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ

karmaṇo nopapadyate

mohāt tasya parityāgas

tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

niyatasya—prescribed duties; tu—but; sannyāsaḥ—renunciation;
karmaṇaḥ—activities; na—never; upapadyate—is deserved; mohāt—by illusion;
tasya—of which; parityāgaḥ—renunciation; tāmasaḥ—in the mode of ignorance;
parikīrtitaḥ—declared.

**TRANSLATION**

Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives up his
prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

Work for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which promote
one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord and offering the
food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are recommended. It is said that a
person in the renounced order of life should not cook for himself. Cooking for
oneself is prohibited, but cooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited.
Similarly, a sannyāsī may perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in
the advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is
to be understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.

### 18.8


duḥkham ity eva yat karma

kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet

sa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ

naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet

duḥkham—unhappy; iti—thus; eva—certainly; yat—that which; karma—work; kāya—body;
kleśa—troublesome; bhayāt—out of; tyajet—fear; saḥ—that; kṛtvā—after doing;
rājasam—in the mode of passion; tyāgam—renunciation; na eva—certainly not;
tyāga—renounced; phalam—results; labhet—gain.

**TRANSLATION**

Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear, is said to
be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of
renunciation.

**PURPORT**

One who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should not give up earning money out of fear
that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his
money in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or if by rising early in the morning one can
advance his transcendental Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one should not desist out of
fear or because such activities are considered troublesome. Such renunciation is
in the mode of passion. The result of passionate work is always miserable. Even
if a person renounces work in that spirit, he never gets the result of
renunciation.

### 18.9


kāryam ity eva yat karma

niyataṁ kriyate ’rjuna

saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalaṁ caiva

sa tyāgaḥ sāttviko mataḥ

kāryam—must be done; iti—thus; eva—thus; yat—that which; karma—work;
niyatam—prescribed; kriyate—performed; arjuna—O Arjuna; saṅgam—association;
tyaktvā—giving up; phalam—result; ca—also; eva—certainly; saḥ—that;
tyāgaḥ—renunciation; sāttvikaḥ—in the mode of goodness; mataḥ—in My opinion.

**TRANSLATION**

But he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be done, and
renounces all attachment to the fruit—his renunciation is of the nature of
goodness, O Arjuna.

**PURPORT**

Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act without
attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the modes of work. A
man working in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in a factory does not associate himself with
the work of the factory, nor with the workers of the factory. He simply works
for Kṛṣṇa. And when he gives up the result for Kṛṣṇa, he is acting
transcendentally.
