### 14.5


sattvaṁ rajas tama iti

guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ

nibadhnanti mahā-bāho

dehe dehinam avyayam

sattvam—mode of goodness; rajaḥ—mode of passion; tamaḥ—mode of ignorance;
iti—thus; guṇāḥ—qualities; prakṛti—material nature; sambhavāḥ—produced of;
nibadhnanti—does condition; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed one; dehe—in this body;
dehinam—the living entity; avyayam—eternal.

**TRANSLATION**

Material nature consists of the three modes—goodness, passion and ignorance.
When the living entity comes in contact with nature, he becomes conditioned by
these modes.

**PURPORT**

The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with this
material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by the material world,
he is acting under the spell of the three modes of material nature. Because
living entities have different kinds of bodies, in terms of the different
aspects of nature, they are induced to act according to that nature. This is the
cause of the varieties of happiness and distress.

### 14.6


tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt

prakāśakam anāmayam

sukha-saṅgena badhnāti

jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

tatra—thereafter; sattvam—mode of goodness; nirmalatvāt—being purest in the
material world; prakāśakam—illuminating; anāmayam—without any sinful reachon;
sukha—happiness; saṅgena—association; badhnāti—conditions; jñāna—knowledge;
saṅgena—association; ca—also; anagha—O sinless one.

**TRANSLATION**

O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situated in that
mode develop knowledge, but they become conditioned by the concept of happiness.

**PURPORT**

The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various types. One is
happy, another is very active, and another is helpless. All these types of
psychological manifestations are causes of the entities’ conditioned status in
nature. How they are differently conditioned is explained in this section of
Bhagavad-gītā. The mode of goodness is first considered. The effect of
developing the mode of goodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser
than those otherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not so much
affected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement in material
knowledge. The representative type is the brāhmaṇa, who is supposed to be
situated in the mode of goodness. This sense of happiness is due to
understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one is more or less free from
sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedic literature it is said that the mode of
goodness means greater knowledge and a greater sense of happiness.

The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in the mode of
goodness, he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in knowledge and is
better than others. In this way he becomes conditioned. The best examples are
the scientist and philosopher: each is very proud of his knowledge, and because
they generally improve their living conditions, they feel a sort of material
happiness. This sense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them bound
by the mode of goodness of material nature. As such, they are attracted toward
working in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they have an attraction for
working in that way, they have to take some type of body in the modes of nature.
Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, or of being transferred to the
spiritual world. Repeatedly, one may become a philosopher, a scientist, or a
poet, and, repeatedly, become entangled in the same disadvantages of birth and
death. But, due to the illusion of the material energy, one thinks that that
sort of life is pleasant.

### 14.7


rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi

tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam

tan nibadhnāti kaunteya

karma-saṅgena dehinam

rajaḥ—mode of passion; rāga-ātmakam—born of desire or lust; viddhi—know;
tṛṣṇā—hankering; saṅga—association; samudbhavam—produced of; tat—that;
nibadhnāti—is bound; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; karma-saṅgena—association with
fruitive activity; dehinam—of the embodied.

**TRANSLATION**

The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of Kuntī,
and because of this one is bound to material fruitive activities.

**PURPORT**

The mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and woman.
Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman. This is called
the mode of passion. And, when the mode of passion is increased, one develops
the hankering for material enjoyment. He wants to enjoy sense gratification. For
sense gratification, a man in the mode of passion wants some honor in society,
or in the nation, and he wants to have a happy family, with nice children, wife,
and house. These are the products of the mode of passion. As long as one is
hankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it is clearly
stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of his activities and
thus becomes bound by such activities. In order to please his wife, children and
society and to keep up his prestige, one has to work. Therefore, the whole
material world is more or less in the mode of passion. Modern civilization is
considered to be advanced in the standards of the mode of passion. Formerly, the
advanced condition was considered to be in the mode of goodness. If there is no
liberation for those in the mode of goodness, what of those who are entangled in
the mode of passion?

### 14.8


tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi

mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām

pramādālasya-nidrābhis

tan nibadhnāti bhārata

tamaḥ—mode of ignorance; tu—but; ajñāna-jam—products of ignorance;
viddhi—knowing; mohanam—delusion; sarva-dehinām—of all embodied beings;
pramāda—madness; ālasya—indolence; nidrābhiḥ—sleep; tat—that; nibadhnāti—binds;
bhārata—O son of Bharata.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Bharata, the mode of ignorance causes the delusion of all living
entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence and sleep, which bind
the conditioned soul.

**PURPORT**

In this verse the specific application of the word tu is very significant. This
means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiar qualification of the
embodied soul. This mode of ignorance is just the opposite of the mode of
goodness. In the mode of goodness, by development of knowledge, one can
understand what is what, but the mode of ignorance is just the opposite.
Everyone under the spell of the mode of ignorance becomes mad, and a madman
cannot understand what is what. Instead of making advancement, one becomes
degraded. The definition of the mode of ignorance is stated in the Vedic
literature: under the spell of ignorance, one cannot understand the thing as it
is. For example, everyone can see that his grandfather has died, and therefore
he will also die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die.
So death is sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money and working very
hard all day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit. This is madness. In
their madness, they are very reluctant to make advancement in spiritual
understanding. Such people are very lazy. When they are invited to associate for
spiritual understanding, they are not much interested. They are not even active
like the man who is controlled by the mode of passion. Thus another symptom of
one embedded in the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required.
Six hours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleeps at
least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be always dejected, and
is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are the symptoms of a person
conditioned by the mode of ignorance.

### 14.9


sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati

rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata

jñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ

pramāde sañjayaty uta

sattvam—mode of goodness; sukhe—in happiness; sañjayati—develops; rajaḥ—mode of
passion; karmaṇi—fruits of activities; bhārata—O son of Bharata;
jñānam—knowledge; āvṛtya—covering; tu—but; tamaḥ—the mode of ignorance;
pramāde—in madness; sañjayati—develops; uta—it is said.

**TRANSLATION**

The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion conditions him to the
fruits of action, and ignorance to madness.

**PURPORT**

A person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or intellectual
pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist, or educator may be engaged in a
particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied in that way. A man in the
modes of passion and goodness may be engaged in fruitive activity; he owns as
much as he can and spends for good causes. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals,
give to charity institutions, etc. These are the signs of one in the mode of
passion. And the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance,
whatever one does is neither good for him nor for anyone.

### 14.10


rajas tamaś cābhibhūya

sattvaṁ bhavati bhārata

rajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaś caiva

tamaḥ sattvaṁ rajas tathā

rajaḥ—mode of passion; tamaḥ—mode of ignorance; ca—also; abhibhūya—also
surpassing; sattvam—mode of goodness; bhavati—becomes prominent; bhārata—O son
of Bharata; rajaḥ—mode of passion; sattvam—mode of goodness; tamaḥ—mode of
ignorance; ca—also; eva—like that; tamaḥ—mode of ignorance; sattvam—mode of
goodness; rajaḥ—mode of passion; tathā—as in this.

**TRANSLATION**

Sometimes the mode of passion becomes prominent, defeating the mode of goodness,
O son of Bharata. And sometimes the mode of goodness defeats passion, and at
other times the mode of ignorance defeats goodness and passion. In this way
there is always competition for supremacy.

**PURPORT**

When the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and ignorance are
defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion and ignorance are
defeated. And, when the mode of ignorance is prominent, passion and goodness are
defeated. This competition is always going on. Therefore, one who is actually
intent on advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness has to transcend these three modes.
The prominence of some certain mode of nature is manifested in one’s dealings,
in his activities, in eating, etc. All this will be explained in later chapters.
But if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode of goodness and thus
defeat the modes of ignorance and passion. One can similarly develop the mode of
passion and defeat goodness and ignorance. Or, one can develop the mode of
ignorance and defeat goodness and passion. Although there are these three modes
of material nature, if one is determined, he can be blessed by the mode of
goodness, and, by transcending the mode of goodness, he can be situated in pure
goodness, which is called the vāsudeva state, a state in which one can
understand the science of God. By the manifestation of particular activities, it
can be understood in what mode of nature one is situated.

### 14.11


sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin

prakāśa upajāyate

jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād

vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta

sarva-dvāreṣu—all the gates; dehe asmin—in this body; prakāśaḥ—quality of
illumination; upajāyate—develops; jñānam—knowledge; yadā—when; tadā—at that
time; vidyāt—must know; vivṛddham—increased; sattvam—mode of goodness; iti—thus;
uta—said.

**TRANSLATION**

The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the gates
of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

**PURPORT**

There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth,
the genital and the anus. In every gate, when the symptom of goodness is
illuminated, it should be understood that one has developed the mode of
goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things in the right position, one
can hear things in the right position, and one can taste things in the right
position. One becomes cleansed inside and outside. In every gate there is
development of the symptoms of happiness, and that is the position of goodness.
