### 14.12


lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ

karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā

rajasy etāni jāyante

vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha

lobhaḥ—greed; pravṛttiḥ—hankering; ārambhaḥ—endeavor; karmaṇām—of activities;
aśamaḥ—uncontrollable; spṛhā—desire; rajasi—in the mode of passion; etāni—all
this; jāyante—develop; vivṛddhe—when there is excess; bharatarṣabha—O chief of
the descendants of Bharata.

**TRANSLATION**

O chief of the Bhāratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion, the
symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire, hankering, and intense
endeavor develop.

**PURPORT**

One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has already
acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to construct a
residential house, he tries his best to have a palatial house, as if he would be
able to reside in that house eternally. And he develops a great hankering for
sense gratification. There is no end to sense gratification. He always wants to
remain with his family and in his house and to continue the process of sense
gratification. There is no cessation of this. All these symptoms should be
understood as characteristic of the mode of passion.

### 14.13


aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś ca

pramādo moha eva ca

tamasy etāni jāyante

vivṛddhe kuru-nandana

aprakāśaḥ—darkness; apravṛttiḥ—inactivity; ca—and; pramādaḥ—madness;
mohaḥ—illusion; eva—certainly; ca—also; tamasi—of the mode of ignorance;
etāni—these; jāyante—are manifested; vivṛddhe—is developed; kuru-nandana—O son
of Kuru.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance madness,
illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested.

**PURPORT**

When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of ignorance
does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act whimsically for no
purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, he makes no endeavor. This is
called illusion. Although consciousness is going on, life is inactive. These are
the symptoms of one in the mode of ignorance.

### 14.14


yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu

pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt

tadottama-vidāṁ lokān

amalān pratipadyate

yadā—when; sattve—mode of goodness; pravṛddhe—in development; tu—but;
pralayam—dissolution; yāti—goes; deha-bhṛt—embodied; tadā—at that time;
uttama-vidām—of the great sages; lokān—the planets; amalān—pure;
pratipadyate—attains.

**TRANSLATION**

When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher planets.

**PURPORT**

One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or Janaloka,
and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalān is significant; it means free
from the modes of passion and ignorance. There are impurities in the material
world, but the mode of goodness is the purest form of existence in the material
world. There are different kinds of planets for different kinds of living
entities. Those who die in the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets
where great sages and great devotees live.

### 14.15


rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā

karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate

tathā pralīnas tamasi

mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate

rajasi—in passion; pralayam—dissolution; gatvā—attaining; karma-saṅgiṣu—in the
association of fruitive activities; jāyate—takes birth; tathā—thereafter;
pralīnaḥ—being dissolved; tamasi—in ignorance; mūḍha—animal; yoniṣu—species;
jāyate—take birth.

**TRANSLATION**

When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those engaged in
fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes birth
in the animal kingdom.

**PURPORT**

Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform of human
life, it never goes down again. This is incorrect. According to this verse, if
one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death he is degraded to the animal
form of life. From there one has to again elevate himself, by evolutionary
process, to come again to the human form of life. Therefore, those who are
actually serious about human life should take to the mode of goodness and in
good association transcend the modes and become situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
This is the aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the human
being will again attain to the human status.

### 14.16


karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ

sāttvikaṁ nirmalaṁ phalam

rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham

ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam

karmaṇaḥ—of work; sukṛtasya—in the mode of goodness; āhuḥ—said; sāttvikam—mode
of goodness; nirmalam—purified; phalam—result; rajasaḥ—of the mode of passion;
tu—but; phalam—result; duḥkham—misery; ajñānam—nonsense; tamasaḥ—of the mode of
ignorance; phalam—result.

**TRANSLATION**

By acting in the mode of goodness, one becomes purified. Works done in the mode
of passion result in distress, and actions performed in the mode of ignorance
result in foolishness.

**PURPORT**

By pious activities in the mode of goodness one is purified; therefore the
sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness. Similarly,
activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable. Any activity for
material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, for example, one wants to have a
skyscraper, so much human misery has to be undergone before a big skyscraper can
be built. The financier has to take much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and
those who are slaving to construct the building have to render physical toil.
The miseries are there. Thus Bhagavad-gītā says that in any activity performed
under the spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery. There
may be a little so-called mental happiness—“I have this house or this money”—but
this is not actual happiness. As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the
performer is without knowledge, and therefore all his activities result in
present misery, and afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is
always miserable, although, under the spell of the illusory energy, māyā, the
animals do not understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also due to the
mode of ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in the future the animal
will have a body suitable to kill them. That is the law of nature. In human
society, if one kills a man he has to be hanged. That is the law of the state.
Because of ignorance, people do not perceive that there is a complete state
controlled by the Supreme Lord. Every living creature is the son of the Supreme
Lord, and He does not tolerate even an ant’s being killed. One has to pay for
it. So, indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is the grossest
kind of ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animals because God has
supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be
understood that he is acting in ignorance and is making his future very dark. Of
all kinds of animal killing, the killing of cows is most vicious because the cow
gives us all kinds of pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the
grossest type of ignorance. In the Vedic literature the words gobhiḥ
prīṇita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied by milk, is
desirous of killing the cow, is in the grossest ignorance. There is also a
prayer in the Vedic literature that states:

namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca jagaddhitāya kṛṣṇāya govindāya namo
namaḥ.

“My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brāhmaṇas, and You are the
well-wisher of the entire human society and world.” The purport is that special
mention is given in that prayer for the protection of the cows and the
brāhmaṇas. Brāhmaṇas are the symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the
symbol of the most valuable food; these two living creatures, the brāhmaṇas and
the cows, must be given all protection—that is real advancement of civilization.
In modern human society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow killing is
encouraged. It is to be understood, then, that human society is advancing in the
wrong direction and is clearing the path to its own condemnation. A civilization
which guides the citizens to become animals in their next lives is certainly not
a human civilization. The present human civilization is, of course, grossly
misled by the modes of passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and
all nations should take care to provide the easiest process, Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, to save humanity from the greatest danger.


### 14.17


sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ

rajaso lobha eva ca

pramāda-mohau tamaso

bhavato ’jñānam eva ca

sattvāt—from the mode of goodness; sañjāyate—develops; jñānam—knowledge;
rajasaḥ—from the mode of passion; lobhaḥ—greed; eva—certainly; ca—also;
pramāda—madness; mohau—illusion; tamasaḥ—from the mode of ignorance;
bhavataḥ—develops; ajñānam—nonsense; eva—certainly; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of passion,
grief develops; and from the mode of ignorance, foolishness, madness and
illusion develop.

**PURPORT**

Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living entities,
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is recommended. Through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, society will
develop the mode of goodness. When the mode of goodness is developed, people
will see things as they are. In the mode of ignorance, people are just like
animals and cannot see things clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example,
they do not see that by killing one animal they are taking a chance of being
killed by the same animal in the next life. Because people have no education in
actual knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,
education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general must be
there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness, they will become
sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then people will be happy and
prosperous. Even if the majority of the people aren’t happy and prosperous, if a
certain percentage of the population develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness and becomes
situated in the mode of goodness, then there is the possibility for peace and
prosperity all over the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes
of passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the mode of
passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for sense enjoyment has no
limit. One can see that even if one has enough money and adequate arrangement
for sense gratification, there is neither happiness nor peace of mind. That is
not possible because one is situated in the mode of passion. If one wants
happiness at all, his money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the
mode of goodness by practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One engaged in the mode of
passion is not only mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupation are also
very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes to acquire enough
money to maintain his status quo. This is all miserable. In the mode of
ignorance, people become mad. Being distressed by their circumstances, they take
shelter of intoxication, and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future
in life is very dark.

### 14.18


ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā

madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ

jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā

adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

ūrdhvam—upwards; gacchanti—goes; sattva-sthāḥ—one who is situated in the mode of
goodness; madhye—in the middle; tiṣṭhanti—dwell; rājasāḥ—those who are situated
in the mode of passion; jaghanya—abominable; guṇa—quality;
vṛtti-sthāḥ—occupation; adhaḥ—down; gacchanti—go; tāmasāḥ—persons in the mode of
ignorance.

**TRANSLATION**

Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in
the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.

**PURPORT**

In this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are more
explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system, consisting of the
heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated. According to the degree of
development of the mode of goodness, the living entity can be transferred to
various planets in this system. The highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka,
where the prime person of this universe, Lord Brahmā, resides. We have seen
already that we can hardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in
Brahmaloka, but the highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring
us to this.

The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of goodness
and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he should be purely in
the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this earth as a king or a rich
man. But because there are mixtures, one can also go down. People on this earth,
in the modes of passion or ignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher
planets by machine. In the mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming
mad in the next life.

The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as abominable. The
result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It is the lowest quality in
material nature. Beneath the human level there are eight million species of
life: birds, beasts, reptiles, trees, etc., and, according to the development of
the mode of ignorance, people are brought down to these abominable conditions.
The word tāmasāḥ is very significant here. Tāmasāḥ indicates those who stay
continually in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode. Their
future is very dark.

There is opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to be
elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity certainly will continue
in the lower modes.
