### 14.27


brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham

amṛtasyāvyayasya ca

śāśvatasya ca dharmasya

sukhasyaikāntikasya ca

brahmaṇaḥ—of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi—certainly; pratiṣṭhā—the rest;
aham—I am; amṛtasya—of the imperishable; avyayasya—immortal; ca—also;
śāśvatasya—of eternal; ca—and; dharmasya—of the constitutional position;
sukhasya—happiness; aikāntikasya—ultimate; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is the constitutional
position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable and eternal.

PURPORT

The constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity, and
happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization. Paramātmā,
the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage in transcendental realization,
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate realization of the
Absolute Truth. Therefore, both Paramātmā and the impersonal Brahman are within
the Supreme Person. It is explained in the Seventh Chapter that material nature
is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord
impregnates the inferior material nature with the fragments of the superior
nature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material nature. When a living
entity conditioned by this material nature begins the cultivation of spiritual
knowledge, he elevates himself from the position of material existence and
gradually rises up to the Brahman conception of the Supreme. This attainment of
the Brahman conception of life is the first stage in self-realization. At this
stage the Brahman realized person is transcendental to the material position,
but he is not actually perfect in Brahman realization. If he wants, he can
continue to stay in the Brahman position and then gradually rise up to Paramātmā
realization and then to the realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
There are many examples of this in Vedic literature. The four Kumāras were
situated first in the impersonal Brahman conception of truth, but then they
gradually rose to the platform of devotional service. One who cannot elevate
himself beyond the impersonal conception of Brahman runs the risk of falling
down. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that although a person may rise to the
stage of impersonal Brahman, without going farther, with no information of the
Supreme Person, his intelligence is not perfectly clear. Therefore, in spite of
being raised to the Brahman platform, there is the chance of falling down if one
is not engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. In the Vedic language it
is also said: raso vai saḥ; rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati. “When one
understands the Personality of God, the reservoir of pleasure, Kṛṣṇa, he
actually becomes transcendentally blissful.” The Supreme Lord is full in six
opulences, and when a devotee approaches Him, there is an exchange of these six
opulences. The servant of the king enjoys on an almost equal level with the
king. And so, eternal happiness, imperishable happiness, eternal life accompany
devotional service. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or eternity, or
imperishability is included in devotional service. This is already possessed by
a person who is engaged in devotional service.

The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lord it over
the material world, and due to this he falls down. In his constitutional
position, a living entity is above the three modes of material nature, but
association with material nature entangles him in the different modes of
material nature, goodness, passion and ignorance. Due to the association of
these three modes, his desire to dominate the material world is there. By
engagement in devotional service in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is immediately
situated in the transcendental position, and his unlawful desire to control
material nature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional service
beginning with hearing, chanting, remembering—the prescribed nine methods for
realizing devotional service—should be practiced in the association of devotees.
Gradually, by such association, by the influence of the spiritual master, one’s
material desire to dominate is removed, and one becomes firmly situated in the
Lord’s transcendental loving service. This method is prescribed from the
twenty-second to the last verse of this chapter. Devotional service to the Lord
is very simple: one should always engage in the service of the Lord, should eat
the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Deity, smell the flowers offered to
the lotus feet of the Lord, see the places where the Lord had His transcendental
pastimes, read of the different activities of the Lord, His reciprocation of
love with His devotees, chant always the transcendental vibration Hare Kṛṣṇna,
Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare,
and observe the fasting days commemorating the appearances and disappearances of
the Lord and His devotees. By following such a process one becomes completely
detached from all material activities. One who can thus situate himself in the
brahmajyoti is equal to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in quality.


The Yoga of the Supreme Person

### 15.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham

aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam

chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni

yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ūrdhva-mūlam—with
roots above; adhaḥ—downwards; śākham—branches; aśvattham—banyan tree;
prāhuḥ—said; avyayam—eternal; chandāṁsi—Vedic hymns; yasya—of which; parṇāni—the
leaves; yaḥ—anyone; tam—that; veda—knows; saḥ—he; veda-vit—the knower of the
Vedas.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots upward and its
branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is
the knower of the Vedas.

PURPORT

After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may question, “What
about the Vedas?” It is explained in this chapter that the purpose of Vedic
study is to understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore one who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who
is engaged in devotional service, already knows the Vedas.

The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan tree. For
one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to the banyan tree.
He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to another. The tree of this
material world has no end, and for one who is attached to this tree, there is no
possibility of liberation. The Vedic hymns, meant for elevating oneself, are
called the leaves of this tree. This tree’s roots grow upward because they begin
from where Brahmā is located, the topmost planet of this universe. If one can
understand this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out of it.

This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous chapters it
has been explained that there are many processes by which to get out of the
material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth Chapter, we have seen that
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is the best way. Now, the basic principle
of devotional service is detachment from material activities and attachment to
the transcendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking attachment to
the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter. The root of
this material existence grows upward. This means that it begins from the total
material substance, from the topmost planet of the universe. From there, the
whole universe is expanded, with so many branches, representing the various
planetary systems. The fruits represent the results of the living entities’
activities, namely, religion, economic development, sense gratification and
liberation.

Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with its
branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That tree can be
found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the trees on the bank reflect
upon the water with their branches down and roots up. In other words, the tree
of this material world is only a reflection of the real tree of the spiritual
world. This reflection of the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as the
tree’s reflection is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things’ being
situated in this reflected material light. One who wants to get out of this
material existence must know this tree thoroughly through analytical study. Then
he can cut off his relationship with it.

This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take Brahmā to be
the root of this material tree, and from the root, according to sāṅkhya
philosophy, come prakṛti, puruṣa, then the three guṇas, then the five gross
elements (pañca-mahābhūta), then the ten senses (daśendriya), mind, etc. In this
way they divide up the whole material world. If Brahmā is the center of all
manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of the center by 180
degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute the spiritual world. The material
world is the perverted reflection, so the spiritual world must have the same
variegatedness, but in reality. The prakṛti is the external energy of the
Supreme Lord, and the puruṣa is the Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained
in Bhagavad-gītā. Since this manifestation is material, it is temporary. A
reflection is temporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But
the origin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The material
reflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that a person
knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut off attachment to this
material world. If one knows that process, he actually knows the Vedas. One who
is attracted by the ritualistic formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the
beautiful green leaves of the tree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the
Vedas. The purpose of the Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead
Himself, is to cut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the
spiritual world.

### 15.2


adhaś cordhvaṁ prasṛtās tasya śākhā

guṇa-pravṛddhā viṣaya-pravālāḥ

adhaś ca mūlāny anusantatāni

karmānubandhīni manuṣya-loke

adhaḥ—downward; ca—and; ūrdhvam—upward; prasṛtāḥ—extended; tasya—its;
śākhāḥ—branches; guṇa—modes of material nature; pravṛddhāḥ—developed;
viṣaya—sense objects; pravālāḥ—twigs; adhaḥ—downward; ca—and; mūlāni—roots;
anusantatāni—extended; karma—according to work; anubandhīni—bound;
manuṣya-loke—in the world of human society.

TRANSLATION

The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the three
modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the senses. This tree
also has roots going down, and these are bound to the fruitive actions of human
society.

PURPORT

The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches are
spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated
manifestations of living entities, such as human beings, animals, horses, cows,
dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower parts of the branches, whereas
on the upper parts are higher forms of living entities: the demigods, Gandharvas
(fairies), and many other higher species of life. As a tree is nourished by
water, so this tree is nourished by the three modes of material nature.
Sometimes we find that a tract of land is barren for want of sufficient water,
and sometimes a tract is very green; similarly, where the modes of material
nature are proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life
are manifested in that proportion.

The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By development of
the different modes of nature, we develop different senses, and, by the senses,
we enjoy different varieties of sense objects. The source of the senses—the
ears, the nose, eyes, etc.—is considered to be the upper twigs, tuned to the
enjoyment of different sense objects. The leaves are sound, form, touch—the
sense objects. The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products of different
varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop attachment and
aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to be the
secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root is from Brahmaloka,
and the other roots are in the human planetary systems. After one enjoys the
results of virtuous activities in the upper planetary systems, he comes down to
this earth and renews his karma or fruitive activities for promotion. This
planet of human beings is considered the field of activities.

### 15.3-4


na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyate

nānto na cādir na ca sampratiṣṭhā

aśvattham enaṁ su-virūḍha-mūlam

asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā

tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ

yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ

tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye

yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī

na—not; rūpam—form; asya—of this tree; iha—in this; tathā—also; upalabhyate—can
be perceived; na—never; antaḥ—end; na—never; ca—also; ādiḥ—beginning; na—never;
ca—also; sampratiṣṭhā—the foundation; aśvattham—banyan tree; enam—this;
suvirūḍha—strongly; mūlam—rooted; asaṅga-śastreṇa—by the weapon of detachment;
dṛḍhena—strong; chittvā—by cutting; tataḥ—thereafter; padam—situation; tat—that;
parimārgitavyam—has to be searched out; yasmin—where; gatāḥ—going; na—never;
nivartanti—comes back; bhūyaḥ—again; tam—to him; eva—certainly; ca—also;
ādyam—original; puruṣam—the Personality of Godhead; prapadye—surrender;
yataḥ—from whom; pravṛttiḥ—beginning; prasṛtā—extension; purāṇī—very old.

TRANSLATION

The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with
determination one must cut down this tree with the weapon of detachment. So
doing, one must seek that place from which, having once gone, one never returns,
and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from whom everything
has begun and in whom everything is abiding since time immemorial.

PURPORT

It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot be
understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the extension of
the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how far the tree extends, nor
can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet one has to find out the cause. “I am
the son of my father, my father is the son of such and such a person, etc.” By
searching in this way, one comes to Brahmā, who is generated by the
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Finally, in this way, when one reaches to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, that is the end of research work. One has to search out
that origin of this tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the
association of persons who are in the knowledge of that Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false
reflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection and
actually become situated in the real tree.

The word asaṅga is very important in this connection because the attachment for
sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very strong.
Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science based on
authoritative scriptures, and one must hear from persons who are actually in
knowledge. As a result of such discussion in the association of devotees, one
comes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is
surrender to Him. The description of that place whence going no one returns to
this false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa, is the original root from whom everything has emanated. To gain favor of
that Personality of Godhead, one has only to surrender, and this is a result of
performing devotional service by hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of this
extension of this material world. This is already explained by the Lord Himself:
ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ. “I am the origin of everything.”

Therefore to get out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material
life, one must surrender to Kṛṣṇa. As soon as one surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa, he
becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
