### 15.5


nirmāna-mohā jita-saṅga-doṣā

adhyātma-nityā vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ

dvandvair vimuktāḥ sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair

gacchanty amūḍhāḥ padam avyayaṁ tat

nir—without; māna—respect; mohāḥ—illusion; jita—having conquered;
saṅga—association; doṣāḥ—faulty; adhyātma—spiritual; nityāḥ—eternity;
vinivṛtta—associated; kāmāḥ—lusts; dvandvaiḥ—with duality; vimuktāḥ—liberated;
sukha-duḥkha—happiness and distress; saṁjñaiḥ—named; gacchanti—attains;
amūḍhāḥ—unbewildered; padam—situation; avyayam—eternal; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

One who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association, who
understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and is freed from the
duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how to surrender unto the
Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.

PURPORT

The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first qualification
is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the conditioned soul is
puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material nature, it is very difficult
for him to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should know by
the cultivation of real knowledge that he is not lord of material nature; the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusion
caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For one who is always
expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possible to surrender to
the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for although one comes here, stays
for a brief time and then goes away, he has the foolish notion that he is the
lord of the world. He thus makes all things complicated, and he is always in
trouble. The whole world moves under this impression. People are considering
that the land, this earth, belongs to human society, and they have divided the
land under the false impression that they are the proprietors. One has to get
out of this false notion that human society is the proprietor of this world.
When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free from all the false
associations caused by familial, social, and national affections. These fake
associations bind one to this material world. After this stage, one has to
develop spiritual knowledge. One has to cultivate knowledge of what is actually
his own and what is actually not his own. And, when one has an understanding of
things as they are, he becomes free from all dual conceptions such as happiness
and distress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in knowledge; then it is
possible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 15.6


na tad bhāsayate sūryo

na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

yad gatvā na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

na—not; tat—that; bhāsayate—illuminates; sūryaḥ—sun; na—nor; śaśāṅkaḥ—the moon;
na—nor; pāvakaḥ—fire, electricity; yat—where; gatvā—going; na—never;
nivartante—comes back; tat dhāma—that abode; paramam—supreme; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by electricity. One
who reaches it never returns to this material world.

PURPORT

The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa—which is known as Kṛṣṇaloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana—is described here. In the
spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine, fire or electricity,
because all the planets are self-luminous. We have only one planet in this
universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but all the planets in the spiritual
sky are self-luminous. The shining effulgence of all those planets (called
Vaikuṇṭhas) constitutes the shining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually, the
effulgence is emanating from the planet of Kṛṣṇa, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Part of that
shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world. Other
than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of spiritual planets,
which are called Vaikuṇṭhas, chief of which is Goloka Vṛndāvana.

As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in conditional
life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky, by cutting through the false,
perverted tree of this material world, he becomes liberated. Then there is no
chance of his coming back here. In his conditional life, the living entity
considers himself to be the lord of this material world, but in his liberated
state he enters into the spiritual kingdom and becomes the associate of the
Supreme Lord. There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.

One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to transfer
himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this false reflection
of reality. For one who is too much attached to this material world, it is very
difficult to cut that attachment, but if he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there
is a chance of gradually becoming detached. One has to associate himself with
devotees, those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should search out a society
dedicated to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and learn how to discharge devotional service.
In this way he can cut off his attachment to the material world. One cannot
become detached from the attraction of the material world simply by dressing
himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the devotional service of
the Lord. Therefore one should take it very seriously that devotional service as
described in the Twelfth Chapter is the only way to get out of this false
representation of the real tree. In Chapter Fourteen the contamination of all
kinds of processes by material nature is described. Only devotional service is
described as purely transcendental.

The words paramaṁ mama are very important here. Actually every nook and corner
is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world is paramam, full of
six opulences. In the Upaniṣads it is also confirmed that in the spiritual world
there is no need of sunshine or moonshine, for the whole spiritual sky is
illuminated by the internal potency of the Supreme Lord. That supreme abode can
be achieved only by surrender and by no other means.

### 15.7


mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati

mama—My; eva—certainly; aṁśaḥ—fragmental particles; jīva-loke—world of
conditional life; jīva-bhūtaḥ—the conditioned living entities;
sanātanaḥ—eternal; manaḥ—mind; ṣaṣṭhāni—six; indriyāṇi—senses; prakṛti—material
nature; sthāni—situated; karṣati—struggling hard.

TRANSLATION

The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses,
which include the mind.

PURPORT

In this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The living
entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord—eternally. It is
not that he assumes individuality in his conditional life and in his liberated
state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He is eternally fragmented. It is
clearly said, sanātanaḥ. According to the Vedic version, the Supreme Lord
manifests and expands Himself in innumerable expansions, of which the primary
expansions are called Viṣṇu-tattva, and the secondary expansions are called the
living entities. In other words, the Viṣṇu-tattva is the personal expansion, and
the living entities are separated expansions. By His personal expansion, He is
manifested in various forms like Lord Rāma, Nṛsiṁhadeva, Viṣṇumūrti and all the
predominating Deities in the Vaikuṇṭha planets. The separated expansions, the
living entities, are eternally servitors. The personal expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the individual identities of the Godhead, are always
present. Similarly, the separated expansions of living entities have their
identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, the living
entities have also fragmental qualities, of which independence is one. Every
living entity has an individual soul, his personal individuality and a minute
form of independence. By misuse of that independence, one becomes a conditioned
soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. In either case,
he is qualititatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In his liberated state he
is freed from this material condition, and he is under the engagement of
transcendental service unto the Lord; in his conditioned life he is dominated by
the material modes of nature, and he forgets the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. As a result, he has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence
in the material world.

The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs, but even
the greater controllers of the material world—Brahmā, Lord Śiva, and even
Viṣṇu—are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. They are all eternal, not
temporary manifestations. The word karṣati (struggling or grappling hard) is
very significant. The conditioned soul is bound up, as though shackled by iron
chains. He is bound up by the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which
is driving him in this material existence. When the mind is in the mode of
goodness, his activities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion, his
activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of ignorance, he
travels in the lower species of life. It is clear, however, in this verse, that
the conditioned soul is covered by the material body, with the mind and the
senses, and when he is liberated this material covering perishes, but his
spiritual body manifests in its individual capacity. The following information
is there in the Mādhyandi-nāyana-śruti: sa vā eṣa brahma-niṣṭha idaṁ sarīraṁ
marttyam atisṛjya brahmābhisampadya brahmaṇā paśyati brahmaṇā śṛnoti
brahmaṇaivedaṁ sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living entity
gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritual world, he
revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear and speak to Him face to face,
and he can understand the Supreme Personality as He is. In smṛti also it is
understood that in the spiritual planets everyone lives in bodies featured like
the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s. As far as bodily construction is
concerned, there is no difference between the part and parcel living entities
and the expansions of Viṣṇumūrti. In other words, at liberation the living
entity gets a spiritual body by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The word mamaivāṁśaḥ (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord) is also
very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is not like some
material broken part. We have already understood in the Second Chapter that the
spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragment is not materially conceived. It
is not like matter which can be cut into pieces and joined together again. That
conception is not applicable here because the Sanskrit word sanātana (eternal)
is used. The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also stated in the beginning
of the Second Chapter that (dehino ’smin yathā) in each and every individual
body, the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present. That fragmental
portion, when liberated from the bodily entanglement, revives its original
spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a spiritual planet and enjoys association
with the Supreme Lord. It is, however, understood here that the living entity,
being the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one,
just as the parts and parcels of gold are also gold.

### 15.8


śarīraṁ yad avāpnoti

yac cāpy utkrāmatīśvaraḥ

gṛhītvaitāni saṁyāti

vāyur gandhān ivāśayāt

śarīram—body; yat—as much as; avāpnoti—gets; yat—that which; ca—also;
api—virtually; utkrāmati—gives up; īśvaraḥ—the lord of the body; gṛhītvā—taking;
etāni—all these; saṁyāti—goes away; vāyuḥ—air; gandhān—smell; iva—like;
āśayāt—from the flower.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in the material world carries his different conceptions of
life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.

PURPORT

Here the living entity is described as īśvara, the controller of his own body.
If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and if he likes he can
move to a lower class. Minute independence is there. The change his body
undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death, the consciousness he has
created will carry him on to the next type of body. If he has made his
consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is sure to change to a cat’s or
dog’s body. And, if he has fixed his consciousness on godly qualities, he will
change into the form of a demigod. And, if he is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he will
be transferred to Kṛṣṇaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with
Kṛṣṇa. It is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything
is finished. The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to another, and
his present body and present activities are the background of his next body. One
gets a different body according to karma, and he has to quit this body in due
course. It is stated here that the subtle body, which carries the conception of
the next body, develops another body in the next life. This process of
transmigrating from one body to another and struggling while in the body is
called karṣati or struggle for existence.

### 15.9


śrotraṁ cakṣuḥ sparśanaṁ ca

rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva ca

adhiṣṭhāya manaś cāyaṁ

viṣayān upasevate

śrotram—ears; cakṣuḥ—eyes; sparśanam—touch; ca—also; rasanam—tongue;
ghrāṇam—smelling power; eva—also; ca—and; adhiṣṭhāya—being situated; manaḥ—mind;
ca—also; ayam—this; viṣayān—sense objects; upasevate—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain type of
ear, tongue, and nose and sense of touch, which are grouped about the mind. He
thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.

PURPORT

In other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with the
qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog body and
enjoys. Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we mix water with a
certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness is pure, for the spirit soul
is pure. But consciousness is changed according to the association of the
material qualities. Real consciousness is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When, therefore,
one is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if his
consciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality, in the next
life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a human body
again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or one of many other
forms, for there are 8,400,000 species.

### 15.10


utkrāmantaṁ sthitaṁ vāpi

bhuñjānaṁ vā guṇānvitam

vimūḍhā nānupaśyanti

paśyanti jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ

utkrāmantam—quitting the body; sthitam—situated in the body; vāpi—either;
bhuñjānam—enjoying; vā—or; guṇa-anvitam—under the spell of the modes of material
nature; vimūḍhāḥ—foolish persons; na—never; anupaśyanti—can see; paśyanti—one
can see; jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ—one who has the eyes of knowledge.

TRANSLATION

The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body, nor can
they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of the modes of
nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can see all this.

PURPORT

The word jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ is very significant. Without knowledge, one cannot
understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what form of body he
is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is living in a particular
type of body. This requires a great amount of knowledge understood from
Bhagavad-gītā and similar literatures heard from a bona fide spiritual master.
One who is trained to perceive all these things is fortunate. Every living
entity is quitting his body under certain circumstances; he is living under
certain circumstances and enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell
of material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of happiness
and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons who are
everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power of understanding their
change of body and their stay in a particular body. They cannot comprehend it.
Those who have developed spiritual knowledge, however, can see that the spirit
is different from the body and is changing its body and enjoying in different
ways. A person in such knowledge can understand how the conditioned living
entity is suffering in this material existence. Therefore those who are highly
developed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness try their best to give this knowledge to the
people in general, for their conditional life is very much troublesome. They
should come out of it and be Kṛṣṇa conscious and liberate themselves to transfer
to the spiritual world.
