### 15.17


uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ

paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ

yo loka-trayam āviśya

bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ

uttamaḥ—the best; puruṣaḥ—personality; tu—but; anyaḥ—another; param—the Supreme;
ātmā—Self; iti—thus; udāhṛtaḥ—said; yaḥ—one who; loka—of the universe;
trayam—the three divisions; āviśya—entering; bibharti—maintaining;
avyayaḥ—inexhaustible; īśvaraḥ—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord Himself,
who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.

PURPORT

This verse is very nicely expressed in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad and Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad. It is clearly stated there that above the innumerable living entities,
some of whom are conditioned and some of whom are liberated, there is the
Supreme Personality who is Paramātmā. The Upanisadic verse runs as follows:
nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. The purport is that amongst all the living
entities, both conditioned and liberated, there is one supreme living
personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who maintains them and gives
them all the facility of enjoyment according to different work. That Supreme
Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone’s heart as Paramātmā. A wise man
who can understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not others.

It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as being on
the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the question of
superiority and inferiority in their personalities. This particular word uttama
is very significant. No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Loke
is also significant because in the Pauruṣa, a Vedic literature, it is stated:
lokyate vedārtho ’nena. This Supreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramātmā
explains the purpose of the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the
Vedas:

tāvad eṣa samprasādo ’smāc charīrāt samutthāya paraṁ jyoti-rūpaṁ sampadya svena
rūpeṇābhiniṣpadyate sa uttamaḥ puruṣaḥ

“The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal brahmajyoti; then in
His form He remains in His spiritual identity. That Supreme is called the
Supreme Personality.” This means that the Supreme Personality is exhibiting and
diffusing His spiritual effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That
Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramātmā. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavatī and Parāśara, He explains the Vedic knowledge as
Vyāsadeva.

### 15.18


yasmāt kṣaram atīto ’ham

akṣarād api cottamaḥ

ato ’smi loke vede ca

prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

yasmāt—because; kṣaram—the fallible; atītaḥ—transcendental; aham—I; akṣarāt—from
the infallible; api—better than that; ca—and; uttamaḥ—the best; ataḥ—therefore;
asmi—I am; loke—in the world; vede—in the Vedic literature; ca—and;
prathitaḥ—celebrated; puruṣottamaḥ—as the Supreme Personality.

TRANSLATION

Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as
that Supreme Person.

PURPORT

No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa—neither the
conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, the greatest of
personalities. Now it is clear here that the living entities and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are individuals. The difference is that the living
entities, either in the conditioned state or in the liberated state, cannot
surpass in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

### 15.19


yo mām evam asammūḍho

jānāti puruṣottamam

sa sarva-vid bhajati māṁ

sarva-bhāvena bhārata

yaḥ—anyone; mām—unto Me; evam—certainly; asammūḍhaḥ—without a doubt;
jānāti—knows; puruṣottamam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saḥ—he;
sarva-vit—knower of everything; bhajati—renders devotional service; mām—unto Me;
sarva-bhāvena—in all respects; bhārata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without doubting, is to
be understood as the knower of everything, and he therefore engages himself in
full devotional service, O son of Bharata

PURPORT

There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional position of
the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in this verse the
Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that anyone who knows Lord Kṛṣṇa
as the Supreme Person is actually the knower of everything. The imperfect knower
goes on simply speculating about the Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower,
without wasting his valuable time, engages directly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the
devotional service of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gītā,
this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there are so many stubborn
commentators on Bhagavad-gītā who consider the Supreme Absolute Truth and the
living entities to be one and the same.

Vedic knowledge is called śruti learning by aural reception. One should actually
receive the Vedic message from authorities like Kṛṣṇa and His representatives.
Here Kṛṣṇa distinguishes everything very nicely, and one should hear from this
source. Simply to hear like the hogs is not sufficient; one must be able to
understand from the authorities. It is not that one should simply speculate
academically. One should submissively hear from Bhagavad-gītā that these living
entities are always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anyone
who is able to understand this, according to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, knows the purpose of the Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of the
Vedas.

The word bhajate is very significant. In many places the word bhajate is
expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If a person is
engaged in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service of the Lord, it is to
be understood that he has understood all the Vedic knowledge. In the Vaiṣṇava
paramparā it is said that if one is engaged in the devotional service of Kṛṣṇa,
then there is no need for a spiritual process to understand the Supreme Absolute
Truth. He has already come to the post because he is engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes of understanding;
similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of thousands of lives, does
not come to the point that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that
one has to surrender there, all his speculation for so many years and lives is a
useless waste of time.

### 15.20


iti guhyatamaṁ śāstram

idam uktaṁ mayānagha

etad buddhvā buddhimān syāt

kṛta-kṛtyaś ca bhārata

iti—thus; guhyatamam—the most confidential; śāstram—revealed scriptures;
idam—this; uktam—disclosed; mayā—by Me; anagha—O sinless one; etat—this;
buddhvā—understanding; buddhimān—intelligent; syāt—one becomes; kṛta-kṛtyaḥ—the
most perfect; ca—and; bhārata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and
it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will become wise, and his
endeavors will know perfection.

PURPORT

The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all revealed
scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent and perfect in
transcendental knowledge. In other words, by understanding this philosophy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging in His transcendental service,
everyone can become freed from all contaminations of the modes of material
nature. Devotional service is a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever
devotional service exists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional
service to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they are
spiritual—the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said to be the
sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present, there is no
question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional service is present under
the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, there is no question of
ignorance.

Everyone must take to this consciousness of Kṛṣṇa and engage in devotional
service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes to this position of
understanding Kṛṣṇa and engages in devotional service, however intelligent he
may be in the estimation of some common man, he is not perfectly intelligent.

The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha, O sinless
one, means that unless one is free from all sinful reactions, it is very
difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa. One has to become free from all contamination,
all sinful activities; then he can understand. But devotional service is so pure
and potent that once one is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes
to the stage of sinlessness.

While performing devotional service in the association of pure devotees in full
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there are certain things which require to be vanquished
altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount is weakness of the
heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to lord it over material
nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord.
The second weakness of the heart is that as one increases the propensity of
lording it over material nature, he becomes attached to matter and the
possession of matter. The problems of material existence are due to these
weaknesses of the heart.
