### 16.13-15


idam adya mayā labdham

imaṁ prāpsye manoratham

idam astīdam api me

bhaviṣyati punar dhanam

asau mayā hataḥ śatrur

haniṣye cāparān api

īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī

siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī

āḍhyo ’bhijanavān asmi

ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā

yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya

ity ajñāna-vimohitāḥ

idam—this; adya—today; mayā—by me; labdham—gained; imam—this; prāpsye—I shall
gain; manoratham—according to my desires; idam—this; asti—there is; idam—this;
api—also; me—mine; bhaviṣyati—will increase in the future; punaḥ—again;
dhanam—wealth; asau—that; mayā—by me; hataḥ—has been killed; śatruḥ—enemy;
haniṣye—I shall kill; ca—also; aparān—others; api—certainly; īśvaraḥ—the lord;
aham—I am; aham—I am; bhogī—the enjoyer; siddhah—perfect; aham—I am;
balavān—powerful; sukhī—happy; āḍhyaḥ—wealthy; abhijanavān—surrounded by
aristocratic relatives; asmi—I am; kaḥ—who else; anyaḥ—other; asti—there is;
sadṛśaḥ—like; mayā—me; yakṣye—I shall sacrifice; dāsyāmi—I shall give in
charity; modiṣye—I shall rejoice; iti—thus; ajñāna—ignorance; vimohitāḥ—deluded
by.

TRANSLATION

The demoniac person thinks: “So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain
more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in the
future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him; and my other enemy
will also be killed. I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I am
perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic
relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform
sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice.” In this way,
such persons are deluded by ignorance.

### 16.16


aneka-citta-vibhrāntā

moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ

prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu

patanti narake ’śucau

aneka—numerous; citta-vibhrāntāḥ—perplexed by anxieties; moha—of illusions;
jāla—by a network; samāvṛtāḥ—surrounded; prasaktāḥ—attached; kāma—lust;
bhogeṣu—sense gratification; patanti—glides down; narake—into hell;
aśucau—unclean.

TRANSLATION

Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, one
becomes too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and falls down into hell.

PURPORT

The demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He only thinks how much assessment he has just now and schemes to
engage that stock of wealth farther and farther. For that reason, he does not
hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals in the black market for illegal
gratification. He is enamoured by the possessions he has already, such as land,
family, house and bank balance, and he is always planning to improve them. He
believes in his own strength, and he does not know that whatever he is gaining
is due to his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to accumulate such
things, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply thinks that all his
mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac person believes in the
strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma. According to the law of
karma, a man takes his birth in a high family, or becomes rich, or very well
educated, or very beautiful because of good work in the past. The demoniac
thinks that all these things are accidental and due to the strength of his
personal ability. He does not sense any arrangement behind all the varieties of
people, beauty, and education. Anyone who comes into competition with such a
demoniac man is his enemy. There are many demoniac people, and each is enemy to
the others. This enmity becomes more and more deep—between persons, then between
families, then between societies, and at last between nations. Therefore there
is constant strife, war and enmity all over the world.

Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all others.
Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the Supreme God, and a
demoniac preacher tells his followers: “Why are you seeking God elsewhere? You
are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you can do. Don’t believe in God.
Throw away God. God is dead.” These are the demoniac’s preachings.

Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and influential, or even
more so, he thinks that no one is richer than him and that no one is more
influential than him. As far as promotion to the higher planetary system is
concerned, he does not believe in performing yajñas or sacrifices. Demons think
that they will manufacture their own process of yajña and prepare some machine,
by which they will be able to reach any higher planet. The best example of such
a demoniac man was Rāvaṇa. He offered a program to the people by which he would
prepare a staircase so that anyone could reach the heavenly planets without
performing sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the Vedas. Similarly, in the
present age such demoniac men are striving to reach the higher planetary systems
by mechanical arrangement. These are examples of bewilderment. The result is
that, without their knowledge, they are gliding toward hell. Here the Sanskrit
word mohajāla is very significant. Jāla means net; like fishes caught in a net,
they have no way to come out.

### 16.17


ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā

dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ

yajante nāma-yajñais te

dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam

ātma-sambhāvitāḥ—self-complacent; stabdhāḥ—impudent; dhana-māna—wealth and false
prestige; mada-anvitāḥ—absorbed in pride; yajante—perform sacrifices; nāma—in
name only; yajñaiḥ—with such a sacrifice; te—they; dambhena—out of pride;
avidhi-pūrvakam—without following any rules and regulations.

TRANSLATION

Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige, they
sometimes perform sacrifices in name only without following any rules or
regulations.

PURPORT

Thinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or scripture, the
demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious or sacrificial rites. And since
they do not believe in authority, they are very impudent. This is due to
illusion caused by accumulating some wealth and false prestige. Sometimes such
demons take up the role of preacher, mislead the people, and become known as
religious reformers or as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing
sacrifices, or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God. Common
men advertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish they are
considered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principles of
spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order of life and
engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so many restrictions
for one who has renounced this world. The demons, however, do not care for such
restrictions. They think that whatever path one can create is one’s own path;
there is no such thing as a standard path one has to follow. The word
avidhi-pūrvakam, meaning disregard for the rules and regulations, is especially
stressed here. These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.

### 16.18


ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ

kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ

mām ātma-para-deheṣu

pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ

ahaṅkāram—false ego; balam—strength; darpam—pride; kāmam—lust; krodham—anger;
ca—also; saṁśritāḥ—having taken shelter of; mām—Me; ātma—one’s own;
para-deheṣu—in other bodies; pradviṣantaḥ—blasphemes; abhyasūyakāḥ—envious.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon becomes
envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in his own body
and in the bodies of others, and blasphemes against the real religion.

PURPORT

A demoniac person, being always against God’s supremacy, does not like to
believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and of the
existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused by his so-called
prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength. He does not know that the
present life is a preparation for the next life. Not knowing this, he is
actually envious of his own self, as well as of others. He commits violence on
other bodies and on his own. He does not care for the supreme control of the
Personality of Godhead because he has no knowledge. Being envious of the
scriptures and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false
arguments against the existence of God and refutes the scriptural authority. He
thinks himself independant and powerful in every action. He thinks that since no
one can equal him in strength, power, or in wealth, he can act in any way and no
one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the advancement of his
sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down by his own power.

### 16.19


tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān

saṁsāreṣu narādhamān

kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān

āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu

tān—those; aham—I; dviṣataḥ—envious; krūrān—mischievous; saṁsāreṣu—into the
ocean of material existence; narādhamān—the lowest of mankind; kṣipāmi—put;
ajasram—innumerable; aśubhān—inauspicious; āsurīṣu—demoniac; eva—certainly;
yoniṣu—in the wombs.

TRANSLATION

Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by
Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular
individual soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme will. The
demoniac person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the Lord, and it is a
fact that he may act according to his own whims, but his next birth will depend
upon the decision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not on himself. In
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Third Canto, it is stated that an individual soul, after
his death, is put into the womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of
body under the supervision of superior power. Therefore in the material
existence we find so many species of life—animals, insects, men, and so on. All
are arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the
demoniac, it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into the wombs
of demons, and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest of mankind. Such
demoniac species of life are held to be always full of lust, always violent and
hateful and always unclean. They are just like so many beasts in a jungle.

### 16.20


āsurīṁ yonim āpannā

mūḍhā janmani janmani

mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya

tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim

āsurīm—demoniac; yonim—species; āpannāḥ—gaining; mūḍhāḥ—the foolish; janmani
janmani—in birth after birth; mām—unto Me; aprāpya—without achieving;
eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; tataḥ—thereafter; yānti—goes;
adhamām—condemned; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such persons can
never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of
existence.

PURPORT

It is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is never
merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniac people, life
after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and, not achieving the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, so that at last they achieve
bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. It is clearly stated that such demons
have practically no chance of receiving the mercy of God at any stage of later
life. In the Vedas also it is stated that such persons gradually sink to become
dogs and hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God should not be
advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons. In answer to
this question, in the Vedānta-sūtra we find that the Supreme Lord has no hatred
for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons, in the lowest status of life
is simply another feature of His mercy. Sometimes the asuras are killed by the
Supreme Lord, but this killing is also good for them, for in Vedic literature we
find that anyone who is killed by the Supreme Lord becomes liberated. There are
instances in history of many asuras—Rāvaṇa, Kaṁsa, Hiraṇyakaśipu—to whom the
Lord appeared in various incarnations just to kill. Therefore God’s mercy is
shown to the asuras if they are fortunate enough to be killed by Him.

### 16.21


tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ

dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ

kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas

tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet

tri-vidham—three kinds of; narakasya—hellish; idam—this; dvāram—gate;
nāśanam—destructive; ātmanaḥ—of the self; kāmaḥ—lust; krodhaḥ—anger; tathā—as
well as; lobhaḥ—greed; tasmāt—therefore; etat—these; trayam—three; tyajet—must
give up.

TRANSLATION

There are three gates leading to this hell—lust, anger, and greed. Every sane
man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.

PURPORT

The beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to satisfy his
lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane man who does not want to
glide down to the species of demoniac life must try to give up these three
enemies which can kill the self to such an extent that there will be no
possibility of liberation from this material entanglement.
