### 16.22


etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya

tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ

ācaraty ātmanaḥ śreyas

tato yāti parāṁ gatim

etaiḥ—by these; vimuktaḥ—being liberated; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
tamaḥ-dvāraiḥ—the gates of ignorance; tribhiḥ—three kinds of; naraḥ—a person;
ācarati—performs ; ātmanaḥ—self; śreyaḥ—benediction; tataḥ—thereafter;
yāti—goes; parām—supreme; gatim—destination.

**TRANSLATION**

The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kuntī, performs acts
conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme
destination.

**PURPORT**

One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust, anger,
and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed, the more his
existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and regulations enjoined in
the Vedic literature. By following the regulative principles of human life, one
gradually raises himself to the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so
fortunate, by such practice, to rise to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
then success is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action
and reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of purification.
The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and anger. By cultivating
knowledge of this process, one can be elevated to the highest position of
self-realization; this self-realization is perfected in devotional service. In
that devotional service, the liberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed.
Therefore, according to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders
of life and the four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritual
order system. There are different rules and regulations for different castes or
divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them, he will be
automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual realization. Then he
can have liberation without a doubt.

### 16.23


yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

vartate kāma-kārataḥ

na sa siddhim avāpnoti

na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

yaḥ—anyone; śāstra-vidhim—the regulations of the scriptures; utsṛjya—giving up;
vartate—remains; kāma-kārataḥ—acting whimsically in lust; na—never; saḥ—he;
siddhim—perfection; avāpnoti—achieves; na—never; sukham—happiness; na—never;
parām—the supreme; gatim—perfectional stage.

**TRANSLATION**

But he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims
attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

**PURPORT**

As described before, the śāstra-vidhim, or the direction of the śāstra, is given
to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyone is expected to
follow these rules and regulations. If one does not follow them and acts
whimsically according to his lust, greed and desire, then he never will be
perfect in his life. In other words, a man may theoretically know all these
things, but if he does not apply them in his own life, then he is to be known as
the lowest of mankind. In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to
be sane and to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the
highest platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But
even if he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and ultimately
does not come to the stage of understanding the Supreme Lord, then all his
knowledge becomes spoiled. Therefore one should gradually raise himself to the
platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service; it is then and there
that he can attain the highest perfectional stage, not otherwise.

The word kāma-cārataḥ is very significant. A person who knowingly violates the
rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, still he acts. This is
called acting whimsically. He knows that this should be done, but still he does
not do it; therefore he is called whimsical. Such persons are destined to be
condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such persons cannot have the perfection which is
meant for the human life. The human life is especially meant for purifying one’s
existence, and one who does not follow the rules and regulations cannot purify
himself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.

### 16.24


tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te

kāryākārya-vyavasthitau

jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ

karma kartum ihārhasi

tasmāt—therefore; śāstram—scriptures; pramāṇam—evidence; te—your; kārya—duty;
akārya—forbidden activities; vyavasthitau—in determining; jñātvā—knowing;
śāstra—of scripture; vidhāna—regulations; uktam—as declared; karma—work;
kartum—to do; iha arhasi—you should do it.

**TRANSLATION**

One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations of
the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he
may gradually be elevated.

**PURPORT**

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of the Vedas
are meant for knowing Kṛṣṇa. If one understands Krsṇa from the Bhagavad-gītā and
becomes situated in Krsṇa consciousness, engaging himself in devotional service,
he has reached the highest perfection of knowledge offered by the Vedic
literature. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu made this process very easy: He asked
people simply to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare and to engage in the devotional service of
the Lord and eat the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Deity. One who is
directly engaged in all these devotional activities is to be understood as
having studied all Vedic literature. He has come to the conclusion perfectly. Of
course, for the ordinary persons who are not in Krsṇa consciousness or who are
not engaged in devotional service, what is to be done and what is not to be done
must be decided by the injunctions of the Vedas. One should act accordingly,
without argument. That is called following the principles of śāstra, or
scripture. Śāstra is without the four principal defects that are visible in the
conditioned soul: imperfect senses, the propensity for cheating, certainty of
committing mistakes, and certainty of being illusioned. These four principal
defects in conditioned life disqualify one from putting forth rules and
regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations as described in the
śāstra—being above these defects—are accepted without alteration by all great
saints, ācāryas, and great souls.

In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generally classified
as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them, however, lead their
lives according to the principles of the Vedas. Without following the principles
of the scriptures, one cannot elevate himself to the perfectional stage. One who
actually, therefore, understands the purport of the śāstras is considered
fortunate.

In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That is the greatest
offense of human life. Therefore, māyā, the material energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is always giving us trouble in the shape of the
threefold miseries. This material energy is constituted of the three modes of
material nature. One has to raise himself at least to the mode of goodness
before the path to understanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without raising
oneself to the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in ignorance and
passion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the modes of passion and
ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, and deride the proper
understanding of the spiritual master, and they do not care for the regulations
of the scriptures. In spite of hearing the glories of devotional service, they
are not attracted. Thus they manufacture their own way of elevation. These are
some of the defects of human society, which lead to the demoniac status of life.
If, however, one is able to be guided by a proper and bona fide spiritual
master, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the higher stage, then
one’s life becomes successful.


The Divisions of Faith

### 17.1


arjuna uvāca

ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa

sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; ye—those; śāstra-vidhim—the regulations of scripture;
utsṛjya—giving up; yajante—worships; śraddhayā—full faith; anvitāḥ—possessed of;
teṣām—of them; niṣṭhā—faith; tu—but; kā—what is that; kṛṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; sattvam—in
goodness; āho—said; rajaḥ—in passion; tamaḥ—in ignorance.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said, O Kṛṣṇa, what is the situation of one who does not follow the
principles of scripture but worships according to his own imagination? Is he in
goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

**PURPORT**

In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person faithful to
a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to the stage of
knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of peace and prosperity. In
the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that one who does not follow the
principles laid down in the scriptures is called an asura, demon, and one who
follows the scriptural injunctions faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now,
if one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna is to be cleared by
Kṛṣṇa. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and
placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness, passion or ignorance? Do such
persons attain the perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be
situated in real knowledge and elevate themselves to the highest perfectional
stage? Do those who do not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures
but who have faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain
success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Kṛṣṇa.

### 17.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā

dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā

sāttvikī rājasī caiva

tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidhā—three
kinds; bhavati—become; śraddhā—faith; dehinām—of the embodied; sā—that;
sva-bhāva-jā—according to his mode of material nature; sāttvikī—mode of
goodness; rājasī—mode of passion; ca—also; eva—certainly; tāmasī—mode of
ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus; tām—that; sṛṇu—hear from Me.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the embodied
soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds—goodness, passion or ignorance. Now hear
about these.

**PURPORT**

Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of laziness
or indolence, give up following these rules and regulations, are governed by the
modes of material nature. According to their previous activities in the modes of
goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature which is of a specific
quality. The association of the living entity with the different modes of nature
has been going on perpetually since the living entity is in contact with
material nature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to his
association with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if one
associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his rules and the
scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from ignorance to goodness,
or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is that blind faith in a particular
mode of nature cannot help a person become elevated to the perfectional stage.
One has to consider things carefully, with intelligence, in the association of a
bona fide spiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode of
nature.

### 17.3


sattvānurūpā sarvasya

śraddhā bhavati bhārata

śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo

yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ

sattva-anurūpā—according to the existence; sarvasya—of everyone; śraddhā—faith;
bhavati—becomes; bhārata—O son of Bhārata; śraddhā—faith; mayaḥ—full; ayam—this;
puruṣaḥ—living entity; yaḥ—anyone; yat—that; śraddhaḥ—faith; saḥ—that;
eva—certainly; saḥ—he.

**TRANSLATION**

According to one’s existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves a
particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith
according to the modes he has acquired.

**PURPORT**

Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But his faith
is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has
acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of faith, one associates with
certain persons. Now the real fact is that every living being, as is stated in
the Fifteenth Chapter, is originally the fragmental part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of
material nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature in
conditional life, he generates his own position by association with the
different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificial faith and
existence are only material. Although one may be conducted by some impression,
or some conception of life, still, originally, he is nirguṇa, or transcendental.
Therefore one has to become cleansed of the material contamination that he has
acquired in order to regain his relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the
only path back without fear: Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is situated in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the
perfectional stage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then
he is surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.

The word sattva, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sattva or faith
always comes out of the works of goodness. One’s faith may be in a demigod or
some created God or some mental concoction. It is supposed to be one’s strong
faith in something that is productive of the works of material goodness. But in
material conditional life, no works of material nature are completely purified.
They are mixed. They are not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental;
in purified goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As long as one’s faith is not completely in purified
goodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes of material
nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand to the heart. Therefore
according to the position of the heart in contact with a particular mode of
material nature, one’s faith is established. It should be understood, that if
one’s heart is in the mode of goodness, his faith is also in the mode of
goodness. If his heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode
of passion. And if his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is
also thus contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, and
there are different types of religions due to different types of faith. The real
principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure goodness, but
because the heart is tainted, we find different types of religious principles.
Thus according to different types of faith, there are different kinds of
worship.
