### 17.4


yajante sāttvikā devān

yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ

pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye

yajante tāmasā janāḥ

yajante—worship; sāttvikāḥ—those who are in the mode of goodness;
devān—demigods; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ—those who are in the mode of passion
worship demons; pretān—dead spirits; bhūta-gaṇān—ghosts; ca anye—and others;
yajante—worship; tāmasāḥ—in the mode of ignorance; janāḥ—people.

TRANSLATION

Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of passion
worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts and
spirits.

PURPORT

In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different kinds of
worshipers according to their external activities. According to scriptural
injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshipable, but those
who are not very conversant with, or faithful to, the scriptural injunctions
worship different objects, according to their specific situations in the modes
of material nature. Those who are situated in goodness generally worship the
demigods. The demigods include Brahmā, Śiva and others such as Indra, Candra and
the sun-god. There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particular
demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the mode of
passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second World War, a man in
Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he had amassed a large
amount of wealth by dealing in the black market. Similarly, those in the modes
of passion and ignorance generally select a powerful man to be God. They think
that anyone can be worshiped as God and that the same results will be obtained.

Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of passion
worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of ignorance, in
darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some
dead man. Sexual service is also considered to be in the mode of darkness.
Similarly, in remote villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have
seen that in India the lower class people sometimes go to the forest, and if
they have knowledge that a ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and
offer sacrifices. These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship.
God worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure goodness.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, sattvaṁ viśuddham vāsudeva-śabditam. “When
a man is situated in pure goodness, he worships Vāsudeva.” The purport is that
those who are completely purified of the material modes of nature and who are
transcendentally situated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and they
worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal Viṣṇu, or Viṣṇu form
in the material world, which is known as philosophized Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is the
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the impersonalists, because
they do not ultimately believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine
that the Viṣṇu form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly,
they imagine that Lord Brahmā is the impersonal form in the material mode of
passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that are worshipable,
but because they think that the actual truth is impersonal Brahman, they dispose
of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end. In conclusion, the different
qualities of the material modes of nature can be purified through association
with persons who are of transcendental nature.

### 17.5-6


aśāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ

tapyante ye tapo janāḥ

dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥ

kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ

karṣayantaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

bhūta-grāmam acetasaḥ

māṁ caivāntaḥ śarīra-sthaṁ

tān viddhy āsura-niścayān

aśāstra—not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam—directed; ghoram—harmful to
others; tapyante—undergo penances; ye—those; tapaḥ—austerities; janāḥ—persons;
dambha—pride; ahaṅkāra—egotism; saṁyuktāḥ—engaged; kāma—lust; rāga—attachment;
bala—force; anvitāḥ—impelled by; karṣayantaḥ—tormenting; śarīra-stham—situated
within the body; bhūtagrāmam—combination of material elements; acetasaḥ—by such
a misled mentality; mām—to Me; ca—also; eva—certainly; antaḥ—within;
śarīra-stham—situated in the body; tān—them; viddhi—understand; āsura—demons;
niścayān—certainly.

TRANSLATION

Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the
scriptures, performing them out of pride, egotism, lust and attachment, who are
impelled by passion and who torture their bodily organs as well as the Supersoul
dwelling within are to be known as demons.

PURPORT

There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which are not
mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some ulterior
purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in the
scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual
advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to
such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gītā, certainly demoniac. Their acts
are against the scriptural injunction and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for
material enjoyment. By such activities, not only are the combination of material
elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such unauthorized fasting
or austerities for some political end are certainly very disturbing to others.
They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that
he can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this
method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not approved by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those who engage in them
are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to the Vedic scriptural
injunctions. The word acetasaḥ is significant in this connection—persons of
normal mental condition must obey the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not
in such a position neglect and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own
way of austerities and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of
the demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them
to take birth in the womb of demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by
demoniac principles life after life without knowing their relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough
to be guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic
wisdom, they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme
goal.

### 17.7


āhāras tv api sarvasya

tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ

yajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ

teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu

āhāraḥ—eating; tu—certainly; api—also; sarvasya—of everyone; trividhaḥ—three
kinds; bhavati—there are; priyaḥ—dear; yajñaḥ—sacrifice; tapaḥ—austerity;
tathā—also; dānam—charity; teṣām—of them; bhedam—differences; imam—thus;
śṛṇu—hear.

TRANSLATION

Even food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the three modes
of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity.
Listen, and I shall tell you of the distinctions of these.

PURPORT

In terms of different situations and the modes of material nature, there are
differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices, austerities and
charities. They are not all conducted on the same level. Those who can
understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of material
nature are actually wise; those who consider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or
charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are
missionary workers who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain
perfection. But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction
of the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people in
general.

### 17.8-10


āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-

sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ

rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā

āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ

kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇa-

tīkṣṇa-rūkṣa-vidāhinaḥ

āhārā rājasasyeṣṭā

duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ

yāta-yāmaṁ gata-rasaṁ

pūti paryuṣitaṁ ca yat

ucchiṣṭam api cāmedhyaṁ

bhojanaṁ tāmasa-priyam

TRANSLATION

Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one’s
existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such nourishing
foods are sweet, juicy, fattening and palatable. Foods that are too bitter, too
sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked by people in the modes of passion.
Such foods cause pain, distress, and disease. Food cooked more than three hours
before being eaten, which is tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean,
is food liked by people in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Thc purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and aid
bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past, great authorities
selected those foods that best aid health and increase life’s duration, such as
milk products, sugar, rice, wheat, fruits and vegetables. These foods are very
dear to those in the mode of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and
molasses, while not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when
mixed with milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All these
foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable things like
meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth verse, have no
connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal fat is available in the
form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all foods. Milk, butter, cheese and
similar products give animal fat in a form which rules out any need for the
killing of innocent creatures. It is only through brute mentality that this
killing goes on. The civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk.
Slaughter is the way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split
peas, dhall, whole wheat, etc.

Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot or overly
mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucous in the stomach, leading
to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness are essentially those
that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than three hours before it is eaten
(except prasādam, food offered to the Lord) is considered to be in the mode of
darkness. Because they are decomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often
attracts people in this mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.

Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was first
offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly persons, especially the
spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of food are considered to be in the
mode of darkness, and they increase infection or disease. Such foodstuffs,
although very palatable to persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked
nor even touched by those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnant
of what is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā the
Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour and milk
when offered with devotion. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam. Of course, devotion and
love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts. But
it is also mentioned that the prasādam should be prepared in a particular way.
Any food prepared by the injunction of the scripture offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can be taken even if prepared long, long ago, because
such food is transcendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and
palatable for all persons, one should offer food to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

### 17.11


aphalākāṅkṣibhir yajño

vidhi-diṣṭo ya ijyate

yaṣṭavyam eveti manaḥ

samādhāya sa sāttvikaḥ

aphala-kāñkṣibhiḥ—devoid of desire for result; yajñaḥ—sacrifice;
vidhi—accordingly; dṛṣtaḥ—direction; yaḥ—anyone; ijyate—performs; yaṣṭavyam—must
be performed; eva—certainly; iti—thus; manaḥ—mind; samādhāya—fixed in; saḥ—he;
sāttvikaḥ—is in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

Of sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to scriptural
rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the nature of goodness.

PURPORT

The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind, but here
it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any such desire. It
should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example, the performance of
rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they are performed with the purpose
of material benefit, but that is not in the mode of goodness. One should go to a
temple or church as a matter of duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and offer flowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use
in going to the temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is
not recommended in the scriptural injunction. One should go simply to offer
respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode of goodness. It is the
duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions of the scriptures and offer
respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
