### 17.12


abhisandhāya tu phalaṁ

dambhārtham api caiva yat

ijyate bharata-śreṣṭha

taṁ yajñaṁ viddhi rājasam

abhisandhāya—desiring; tu—but; phalam—the result; dambha—pride; artham—material
benefits; api—also; ca—and; eva—certainly; yat—that which; ijyate—worship;
bharata-śreṣṭha—O chief of the Bhāratas; tam—that; yajñam—sacrifice;
viddhi—know; rājasam—in the mode of passion.

**TRANSLATION**

But that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or performed
ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, O chief of the
Bhāratas.

**PURPORT**

Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the heavenly
kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such sacrifices or
ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode of passion.

### 17.13


vidhi-hīnam asṛṣṭānnaṁ

mantra-hīnam adakṣiṇam

śraddhā-virahitaṁ yajñaṁ

tāmasaṁ paricakṣate

vidhi-hīnam—without scriptural direction; asṛṣṭa-annam—without distribution of
prasādam; mantra-hīnam—with no chanting of the Vedic hymns; adakṣiṇam—with no
remunerations to the priests; śraddhā—faith; virahitam—without;
yajñam—sacrifice; tāmasam—in the mode of ignorance; paricakṣate—is to be
considered.

**TRANSLATION**

And that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in which no
spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and no remunerations are
made to the priests, and which is faithless—that sacrifice is of the nature of
ignorance.

**PURPORT**

Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness. Sometimes
people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend the money for
recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial shows of
religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are all in the mode of darkness;
they produce a demoniac mentality and do not benefit human society.

### 17.14


deva-dvija-guru-prājña-

pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam

brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca

śārīraṁ tapa ucyate

deva—the Supreme Lord; dvija—the brāhmaṇa; guru—the spiritual master;
prājña—worshipable personalities; pūjanam—worship; śaucam—cleanliness;
ārjavam—simplicity; brahma-caryam—celibacy; ahiṁsā—nonviolence; ca—also;
śārīram—pertaining to the body; tapaḥ—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

The austerity of the body consists in this: worship of the Supreme Lord, the
brāhmaṇas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother.
Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence are also austerities of the
body.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and penance.
First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body. One should
offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the perfect,
qualified brāhmaṇas and the spiritual master and superiors like father, mother
or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should be given
proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and internally,
and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything
which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunction. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only in
marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are penances and
austerities as far as the body is concerned.

### 17.15


anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ

satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat

svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva

vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate

anudvega—not agitating; karam—producing; vākyam—words; satyam—truthful;
priya—dear; hitam—beneficial; ca—also; yat—which; svādhyāya—Vedic study;
abhyasanam—practice; ca—also; eva—certainly; vāṅmayaṁ—of the voice;
tapaḥ—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially and in
avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedas regularly.

**PURPORT**

One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of course,
when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his
students, but such a teacher should not speak to others who are not his students
if he will agitate their minds. This is penance as far as talking is concerned.
Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles,
one’s statements must be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from
scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such talk
should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive the
highest benefit and elevate human society. There is a limitless stock of Vedic
literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.


### 17.16


manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ

maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat

tapo mānasam ucyate

manaḥ-prasādaḥ—satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam—without duplicity towards
others; maunam—gravity; ātma—self; vinigrahaḥ—control; bhāva—nature;
saṁśuddhiḥ—purification; iti—thus; etat—that is; tapaḥ—austerity; mānasam—of the
mind; ucyate—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And serenity, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of thought are the
austerities of the mind.

**PURPORT**

To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It should be
so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others. The best
training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratification. To purify one’s nature
is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by
taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of
sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age we
unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense gratification,
and so there is no possibility of the mind’s becoming satisfied. The best course
is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of satisfying
stories, as in the Purāṇas and the Mahābhārata. One can take advantage of this
knowledge and thus become purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and
one should think of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always
thinking of self-realization. The person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness observes perfect
silence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mind from sense
enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealing and thereby purify his
existence. All these qualities together constitute austerity in mental
activities.

### 17.17


śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ

tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ

aphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ

sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate

śraddhayā—with faith; parayā—transcendental; taptam—executed; tapaḥ—austerity;
tat—that; tri-vidham—three kinds; naraiḥ—by men; aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ—without
desires for fruits; yuktaiḥ—engaged; sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness;
pari-cakṣate—is called.

**TRANSLATION**

This threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature of goodness.

### 17.18


satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ

tapo dambhena caiva yat

kriyate tad iha proktaṁ

rājasaṁ calam adhruvam

satkāra—respect; māna—honor; pūjā-artham—for worship; tapaḥ—austerity;
dambhena—with pride; ca—also; eva—certainly; yat—which is; kriyate—performed;
tat—that; iha—in this world; proktam—is said; rājasam—in the mode of passion;
calam—flickering; adhruvam—temporary.

**TRANSLATION**

Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in order to gain
respect, honor and reverence are said to be in the mode of passion. They are
neither stable nor permanent.

**PURPORT**

Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive
honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of passion arrange
to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer riches.
Such arrangements artificially made by the performance of penances are
considered to be in the mode of passion. The results are temporary; they can be
continued for some time, but they are not permanent.

### 17.19


mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat

pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ

parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

mūḍha—foolish; grāheṇa—with endeavor; ātmanaḥ—of one’s own self; yat—which;
pīḍayā—by torture; kriyate—is performed; tapaḥ—penance; parasya—to others;
utsādanārtham—causing annihilation; vā—or; tat—that; tāmasam—in the mode of
darkness; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

**TRANSLATION**

And those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by means of
obstinant self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, are said to be in the
mode of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like Hiraṇyakaśipu,
who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill the demigods. He
prayed to Brahmā for such things, but ultimately he was killed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. To undergo penances for something which is impossible is
certainly in the mode of ignorance.

### 17.20


dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ

dīyate ’nupakāriṇe

deśe kāle ca pātre ca

tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam

dātavyam—worth giving; iti—thus; yat—that which; dānam—charity; dīyate—given;
anupakāriṇe—to any person irrespective of doing good; dese—in place; kāle—in
time; ca—also; pātre—suitable person; ca—and; tat—that; dānam—charity;
sāttvikam—in the mode of goodness; smṛtam—consider.

**TRANSLATION**

That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a worthy
person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be charity in the
mode of goodness.

**PURPORT**

In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving charity
indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always a consideration. Therefore
charity is recommended to be given at a place of pilgrimage and at lunar or
solar eclipses or at the end of the month or to a qualified brāhmaṇa or a
Vaiṣṇava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should be given without any
consideration of return. Charity to the poor is sometimes given out of
compassion, but if a poor man is not worth giving charity to, then there is no
spiritual advancement. In other words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended
in the Vedic literature.
