### 17.21


yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ

phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ

dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ

tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam

yat—that which; tu—but; prati-upakāra-artham—for the sake of getting some
return; phalam—result; uddiśya—desiring; vā—or; punaḥ—again; dīyate—is given in
charity; ca—also; parikliṣṭam—grudgingly; tat—that; dānam—charity; rājasam—in
the mode of passion; smṛtam—is understood to be.

TRANSLATION

But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire for
fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of
passion.

PURPORT

Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and
sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. “Why have I spent
so much in this way?” Charity is also sometimes made under some obligation, at
the request of a superior. These kinds of charity are said to be made in the
mode of passion.

There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to institutions
where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not recommended in the
Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is recommended.

### 17.22


adeśa-kāle yad dānam

apātrebhyaś ca dīyate

asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ

tat tāmasam udāhṛtam

adesa—unpurified place; kāle—unpurified time; yat—that which is; dānam—charity;
apātrebhyaḥ—to unworthy persons; ca—also; dīyate—is given; asatkṛtam—without
respect; avajñātam—without proper attention; tat—that; tāmasam—in the mode of
darkness; udāhṛtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And charity performed at an improper place and time and given to unworthy
persons without respect and with contempt is charity in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not encouraged
here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such charity is not
beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged. Similarly, if a person gives
charity to a suitable person without respect and without attention, that sort of
charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.

### 17.23


oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo

brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ

brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca

yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā

om—indication of the Supreme; tat—that; sat—eternal; iti—that;
nirdeśaḥ—indication; brāhmaṇāḥ—of the Supreme; tri-vidhaḥ—three kinds;
smṛtaḥ—consider; brahmaṇaḥ—the brāhmaṇas; tena—therefore; vedāḥ—the Vedic
literature; ca—also; yajñāḥ—sacrifice; ca—also; vihitāḥ—sacrifice;
purā—formerly.

TRANSLATION

From the beginning of creation, the three syllables—om tat sat—have been used to
indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were uttered by brāhmaṇas
while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices, for the satisfaction of the
Supreme.

PURPORT

It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided
into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. But whether
first class, second class or third class, they are all conditioned, contaminated
by the material modes of nature. When they are aimed at the Supreme—om tat sat,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal—they become means for spiritual
elevation. In the scriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These
three words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om is always found.

One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not attain
the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the ultimate end
of life. The conclusion is that the performance of charities, sacrifice and
penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the modes of passion
or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three words om tat sat
are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tad
viṣṇoḥ. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is uttered,
om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. These three words are
taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmaṇo nediṣṭaṁ nāma indicates the first
goal. Then tattvamasi indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya indicates
the third goal. Combined they become om tat sat. Formerly when Brahmā, the first
created living entity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplic
succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gītā recommends,
therefore, that any work done should be done for om tat sat, or for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. When one performs penance, charity, and sacrifice with
these three words, he is acting in Krṣna consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a
scientific execution of transcendental activities which enables one to return
home, back to Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a
transcendental way.

### 17.24


tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya

yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

pravartante vidhānoktāḥ

satataṁ brahma-vādinām

tasmāt—therefore; om—beginning with om; iti—thus; udāhṛtya—indicating;
yajña—sacrifice; dāna—charity; tapaḥ—penance; kriyāḥ—performances;
pravartante—begins; vidhāna-uktāḥ—according to scriptural regulation;
satatam—always; brahma-vādinām—of the transcendentalists.

TRANSLATION

Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and penances,
beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.

PURPORT

Om tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. The lotus feet of Viṣṇu are the supreme devotional
platform. The performance of everything on behalf of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.

### 17.25


tad ity anabhisandhāya

phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ

dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ

kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ

tat—that; iti—they; anabhisandhāya—without fruitive result; phalam—result of
sacrifice; yajña—sacrifice; tapaḥ—penance; kriyāḥ—activities; dāna—charity;
kriyāḥ—activities; ca—also; vividhāḥ—varieties; kriyante—done;
mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ—those who actually desire liberation.

TRANSLATION

One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose
of such transcendental activities is to get free from the material entanglement.

PURPORT

To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material
gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to the
spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.

### 17.26-27


sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca

sad ity etat prayujyate

praśaste karmaṇi tathā

sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate

yajñe tapasi dāne ca

sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate

karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ

sad ity evābhidhīyate

sat-bhāve—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sādhu-bhāve—in the sense of
the nature of devotion; ca—also; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; etat—this;
prayujyate—is used; praśaste—bona fide; karmaṇi—activities; tathā—also;
sat-śabdaḥ—sound; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yujyate—is used; yajñe—sacrifice;
tapasi—in penance; dāne—charity; ca—also; sthitiḥ—situated; sat—the Supreme;
iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—pronounced; karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly;
tat—that; arthīyam—are meant; sat—Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly;
abhidhīyate—is practiced.

TRANSLATION

The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is indicated
by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and of charity, true to
the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Pṛthā.

PURPORT

The words praśaste karmaṇi, or prescribed duties, indicate that there are many
activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes
beginning from parental care up to the end of one’s life. Such purificatory
processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all
such activities it is recommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words
sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation. One who is
acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious
of activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called svarūpa. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the
association of the devotees. Without good association, one cannot achieve
transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred
thread, one vibrates the words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yogic
performances, the supreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat
are used to perfect all activities. This supreme om tat sat makes everything
complete.

### 17.28


aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ

tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat

asad ity ucyate pārtha

na ca tat pretya no iha

aśraddhayā—without faith; hutam—performed; dattam—given; tapaḥ—penance;
taptam—executed; kṛtam—performed; ca—also; yat—that which; asat—falls; iti—thus;
ucyate—is said to be; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; na—never; ca—also; tat—that;
pretya—after death; no—nor; iha—in this life.

TRANSLATION

But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in the Supreme
are nonpermanent, O son of Pṛthā, regardless of whatever rites are performed.
They are called asat and are useless both in this life and the next.

PURPORT

Anything done without the transcendental objective—whether it be sacrifice,
charity or penance-is useless. Therefore, in this verse, it is declared that
such activities are abominable. Everything should be done for the Supreme in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper guidance, there
can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is
advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the
understanding of Kṛṣṇa. No one can obtain success without following this
principle. Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is
the way to make everything successful.

In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods, ghosts, or
Yakṣas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes of passion and
ignorance, but one who takes directly to Kṛṣṇa consciousness is transcendental
to all three modes of material nature. Although there is a process of gradual
elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes directly to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. To
achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritual master and
receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve faith in the Supreme.
When that faith matures, in course of time, it is called love of God. This love
is the ultimate goal of the living entities. One should, therefore, take to
Krṣṇa consciousness directly. That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.
