### 9.4


mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

mayā—by Me; tatam—spread; idam—all these manifestations; sarvam—all;
jagat—cosmic manifestation; avyakta-mūrtinā—unmanifested form; mat-sthāni—unto
Me; sarva-bhūtāni—all living entities; na—not; ca—also; aham—I; teṣu—in them;
avasthitaḥ—situated.

TRANSLATION

By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are
in Me, but I am not in them.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross material
senses. It is said that Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, pastimes, etc., cannot be
understood by material senses. Only to one who is engaged in pure devotional
service under proper guidance is He revealed. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is
stated, premāñjanacchurita.… One can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Govinda, always within himself and outside himself if he has developed the
transcendental loving attitude towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not
visible. Here it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present,
He is yet not conceivable by the material senses. But actually, although we
cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we have discussed in the
Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmic manifestation is only a combination
of His two different energies, the superior spiritual energy and the inferior
material energy. Just as the sunshine is spread all over the universe, the
energy of the Lord is spread all over the creation, and everything is resting in
that energy.

Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lost His
personal existence. To refute such argument the Lord says, “I am everywhere, and
everything is in Me, but still I am aloof.” For example, a king heads a
government which is but the manifestation of the king’s energy; the different
governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king, and each
department is resting on the king’s power. But still one cannot expect the king
to be present in every department personally. That is a crude example.
Similarly, all the manifestations that we see, and everything that exists both
in this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the diffusion of
His different energies, and, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, He is everywhere
present by His personal representation, the diffusion of His different energies.

### 9.5


na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni

paśya me yogam aiśvaram

bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho

mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

na—never; ca—also; mat-sthāni—situated in Me; bhūtāni—all creation; paśya—just
see; me—My; yogam aiśvaram—inconceivable mystic power; bhūta-bhṛt—maintainer of
all living entities; na—never; ca—also; bhūta-sthaḥ—in the cosmic manifestation;
mama—My; ātmā—Self; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ—is the source of all manifestations.

TRANSLATION

And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic
opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities, and although I am
everywhere, still My Self is the very source of creation.

PURPORT

The Lord says that everything is resting on Him. This should not be
misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the maintenance and
sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see a picture of Atlas
holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to be very tired, holding this
great earthly planet. Such an image should not be entertained in connection with
Kṛṣṇa’s upholding this created universe. He says that although everything is
resting on Him, still He is aloof. The planetary systems are floating in space,
and this space is the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is different from
space. He is differently situated. Therefore the Lord says, “Although they are
situated on My inconceivable energy, still, as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, I am aloof from them.” This is the inconceivable opulence of the Lord.

In the Vedic dictionary it is said, “The Supreme Lord is performing
inconceivably wonderful pastimes, displaying His energy. His person is full of
different potent energies, and His determination is itself actual fact. In this
way the Personality of Godhead is to be understood.” We may think to do
something, but there are so many impediments, and sometimes it is not possible
to do as we like. But when Kṛṣṇa wants to do something, simply by His willing,
everything is performed so perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being
done. The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer and sustainer
of all material manifestation, He does not touch this material manifestation.
Simply by His supreme will everything is created, everything is sustained,
everything is maintained, and everything is annihilated. There is no difference
between His mind and Himself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our
present material mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lord is
present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how He is also
present personally. He is different from this material manifestation, yet
everything is resting on Him. This is explained here as yogam aiśvaram, the
mystic power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 9.6


yathākāśa-sthito nityaṁ

vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahān

tathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni

mat-sthānīty upadhāraya

yathā—as much as; ākāśa-sthitaḥ—situated in space; nityam—always; vāyuḥ—wind;
sarvatra-gaḥ—blowing everywhere; mahān—great; tathā—similarly;
sarvāṇi—everything, bhūtāni—created beings; mat-sthāni—situated in Me; iti—thus;
upadhāraya—try to understand.

TRANSLATION

As the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space know that
in the same manner all beings rest in Me.

PURPORT

For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge material
creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an example which may help us
to understand. Space is the biggest manifestation we can conceive. The cosmic
manifestation rests in space. Space permits the movement of even the atoms and
on up to the greatest planets, the sun and the moon. Although the sky (or wind
or air) is great, still it is situated within space. Space is not beyond the
sky.

Similarly, all the wonderful cosmic manifestations are existing by the supreme
will of God, and all of them are subordinate to that supreme will. As we
generally say, not a blade of grass moves without the will of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus everything is moving under His will: by His will
everything is being created, everything is being maintained, and everything is
being annihilated. Still He is aloof from everything, as space is always aloof
from the activities of the atmosphere. In the Upaniṣads, it is stated, “It is
out of the fear of the Supreme Lord that the wind is blowing.” In the Garga
Upaniṣad also it is stated, “By the supreme order, under the superintendence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the moon, the sun and the great planets are
moving.” In the Brahma-saṁhitā this is also stated. There is also a description
of the movement of the sun, and it is said that the sun is considered to be one
of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense potency to diffuse heat
and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit by the order and the
supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedic literature we can find evidence that
this material manifestation, which appears to us to be very wonderful and great,
is under the complete control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will
be further explained in the later verses of this chapter.

### 9.7


sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya

prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām

kalpa-kṣaye punas tāni

kalpādau visṛjāmy aham

sarva-bhūtāni—all created entities; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; prakṛtim—nature;
yānti—enter; māmikām—unto Me; kalpa-kṣaye—at the end of the millennium;
punaḥ—again; tāni—all those; kalpa-ādau—in the beginning of the millennium;
visṛjāmi—I create; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

O son of Kuntī, at the end of the millennium every material manifestation enters
into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My potency I
again create.

PURPORT

The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic manifestation
is completely dependant on the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead. “At
the end of the millennium” means at the death of Brahmā. Brahmā lives for one
hundred years, and his one day is calculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly
years. His night is of the same duration. His month consists of thirty such days
and nights, and his year of twelve months. After one hundred such years, when
Brahmā dies, the devastation or annihilation takes place; this means that the
energy manifested by the Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself. Then again,
when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is done by His will:
“Although I am one, I shall become many.” This is the Vedic aphorism. He expands
Himself in this material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again takes
place.

### 9.8


prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya

visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ

bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam

avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt

prakṛtim—material nature; svām—of My personal self; avaṣṭabhya—enter in;
visṛjāmi—create; punaḥ punaḥ—again, again; bhūta-grāmam—all these cosmic
manifestations; imam—this; kṛtsnam—total; avaśam—automatically; prakṛteḥ—by the
force of nature; vaśāt—under obligation.

TRANSLATION

The whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again and again,
and by My will it is annihilated at the end.

PURPORT

This matter is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several times. At the
creation, the material energy is let loose as mahat-tattva, into which the Lord
as His first Puruṣa incarnation, Mahā-Viṣṇu, enters. He lies within the Causal
Ocean and breathes out innumerable universes, and into each universe the Lord
again enters as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Each universe is in that way created. He
still further manifests Himself as Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and that Viṣṇu enters
into everything—even into the minute atom. This fact is explained here. He
enters into everything.

Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnated into this
material nature, and as a result of their past deeds they take different
positions. Thus the activities of this material world begin. The activities of
the different species of living beings are begun from the very moment of the
creation. It is not that all is evolved. The different species of life are
created immediately along with the universe. Men, animals, beasts,
birds—everything is simultaneously created, because whatever desires the living
entities had at the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly stated
here that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. The state of
being in their past life in the past creation is simply manifested again, and
all this is done simply by His will. This is the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme Personality of God. And after creating different species of life, He has
no connection with them. The creation takes place to accommodate the
inclinations of the various living entities, and so the Lord does not become
involved with it.


### 9.9


na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi

nibadhnanti dhanañjaya

udāsīna-vad āsīnam

asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu

na—never; ca—also; mām—Me; tāni—all those; karmāṇi—activities; nibadhnanti—bind;
dhanañjaya—O conquerer of riches; udāsīnavat—as neutral; āsīnam—situated;
asaktam—without attraction; teṣu—in them; karmasu—in activities.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanañjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached, seated as though
neutral.

PURPORT

One should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is always engaged. In the
Brahma-saṁhitā it is stated: “He is always involved in His eternal, blissful,
spiritual activities, but He has nothing to do with these material activities.”
Material activities are being carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is
always neutral in the material activities of the created world. This neutrality
is explained here. Although He has control over every minute detail of matter,
He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a high court judge
sitting on his bench. By his order so many things are happening: someone is
being hanged, someone is being put into jail, someone is awarded a huge amount
of wealth—but still he is neutral. He has nothing to do with all that gain and
loss. Similarly, the Lord is always neutral, although He has His hand in every
sphere of activity. In the Vedānta-sūtra it is stated that He is not situated in
the dualities of this material world. He is transcendental to these dualities.
Nor is He attached to the creation and annihilation of this material world. The
living entities take their different forms in the various species of life
according to their past deeds, and the Lord doesn’t interfere with them.
