### 9.10


mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

mayā—by Me; adhyakṣeṇa—by superintendence; prakṛtiḥ—material nature;
sūyate—manifest; sa—with; carācaram—moving and nonmoving; hetunā—for this
reason; anena—this; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; jagat—the cosmic manifestation;
viparivartate—is working.

TRANSLATION

This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is
producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is
created and annihilated again and again.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from all the
activities of the material world, remains the supreme director. The Supreme Lord
is the supreme will and the background of this material manifestation, but the
management is being conducted by material nature. Kṛṣṇa also states in
Bhagavad-gītā that of all the living entities in different forms and species, “I
am the Father.” The father gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child,
and similarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the living
entities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in their different
forms and species, according to their last desires and activities. All these
living entities, although born under the glance of the Supreme Lord, still take
their different bodies according to their past deeds and desires. So the Lord is
not directly attached to this material creation. He simply glances over material
nature; material nature is thus activated, and everything is created
immediately. Because He glances over material nature, there is undoubtedly
activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has nothing to do with the
manifestation of the material world directly. This example is given in the
smṛti: when there is a fragrant flower before someone, the fragrance is touched
by the smelling power of the person, yet the smelling and the flower are
detached from one another. There is a similar connection between the material
world and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has nothing to do with
this material world, but He creates by His glance and ordains. In summary,
material nature, without the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme Personality is detached from all
material activities.

### 9.11


avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram

avajānanti—deride; mām—Me; mūḍhāḥ—foolish men; mānuṣīm—in a human form;
tanum—body; āśritam—assuming; param—transcendental; bhāvam—nature; ajānantaḥ—not
knowing; mama—Mine; bhūta—everything that be; maheśvaram—supreme proprietor.

TRANSLATION

Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.

PURPORT

From the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it is clear
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing like a human being,
is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead, who conducts the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the complete cosmic manifestation, cannot be a
human being. Yet there are many foolish men who consider Kṛ,sṇa to be merely a
powerful man and nothing more. Actually, He is the original Supreme Personality,
as is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (iśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛsṇaḥ); He is the
Supreme Lord.

There are many īśvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than another. In
the ordinary management of affairs in the material world, we find some official
or director, and above him there is a secretary, and above him a minister, and
above him a president. Each of them is a controller, but one is controlled by
another. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller;
there are many controllers undoubtedly both in the material and spiritual world,
but Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller (īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ), and His body is
sac-cid-ānanda, non-material.

Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previous verses.
His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Although He is not a common
man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be a man. His body is called
here mānuṣīm because He is acting just like a man, a friend of Arjuna’s, a
politician involved in the Battle of Kurukṣetra. In so many ways He is acting
just like an ordinary man, but actually His body is
sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha—eternal bliss and knowledge absolute. This is confirmed
in the Vedic language also (sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya kṛṣṇāya): “I offer my
obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who is the eternal
blissful form of knowledge.” There are other descriptions in the Vedic language
also. Tam ekaṁ govindam: “You are Govinda, the pleasure of the senses and the
cows.” Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraham: “And Your form is transcendental, full of
knowledge, bliss and eternality.”

Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s body, its full bliss and
knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentators of Bhagavad-gītā
who deride Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary man. The scholar may be born an extraordinary
man due to his previous good work, but this conception of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is due to a
poor fund of knowledge. Therefore he is called mūḍha, for only foolish persons
consider Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary human being because they do not know the
confidential activities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They do
not know that Kṛṣṇa’s body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss, that He
is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award liberation to
anyone. Because they do not know that Kṛṣṇa has so many transcendental
qualifications, they deride Him.

Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
this material world is a manifestation of His internal energy. He is the master
of the material energy. As has been explained in several places (mama māyā
duratyayā), He claims that the material energy, although very powerful, is under
His control, and whoever surrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this
material energy. If a soul surrendered to Kṛṣṇa can get out of the influence of
material energy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who conducts the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic nature, have a material body
like us? So this conception of Kṛṣṇa is complete foolishness. Foolish persons,
however, cannot conceive that the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, appearing just
like an ordinary man, can be the controller of all the atoms and of the gigantic
manifestation of the universal form. The biggest and the minutest are beyond
their conception, so they cannot imagine that a form like that of a human being
can simultaneously control the infinite and the minute. Actually although He is
controlling the infinite and the finite, He is apart from all this
manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning His yogam aiśvaram, His
inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can control the infinite and the
finite simultaneously and that He can remain aloof from them. Although the
foolish cannot imagine how Kṛṣṇa, who appears just like a human being, can
control the infinite and the finite, those who are pure devotees accept this,
for they know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they
completely surrender unto Him and engage in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotional
service of the Lord.

There are many controversies amongst the impersonalists and the personalists
about the Lord’s appearance as a human being. But if we consult Bhagavad-gītā
and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the authoritative texts for understanding the science of
Kṛṣṇa, then we can understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is not an ordinary man, although He appeared on this earth as an ordinary
human. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, when the sages
inquire about the activities of Kṛṣṇa, it is stated that His appearance as a man
bewilders the foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful acts that
Kṛṣṇa performed while He was present on this earth. When Kṛṣṇa appeared before
His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devakī, He appeared with four hands, but
after the prayers of the parents, He transformed Himself into an ordinary child.
His appearance as an ordinary human being is one of the features of His
transcendental body. In the Eleventh Chapter of the Gītā also it is stated,
tenaiva rūpeṇa etc. Arjuna prayed to see again that form of four hands, and when
Kṛṣṇa was thus petitioned by Arjuna, He again assumed His original form. All
these different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those of an
ordinary human being.

Some of those who deride Kṛṣṇa, who are infected with the Māyāvādī philosophy,
quote the following verse from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to prove that Kṛṣṇa is just
an ordinary man: ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā: “The Supreme is
present in every living entity.” (Bhāg. 3.29.21) We should better take note of
this particular verse from the Vaiṣṇava ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī instead of
following the interpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Kṛṣṇa. Jīva
Gosvāmī, commenting on this verse, says that Kṛṣṇa, in His plenary expansion as
Paramātmā, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as the
Supersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention to the
arca-mūrti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and does not respect
other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form of the Lord in the
temple. There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord, and the neophyte is in
the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee gives more attention to the Deity in the
temple than to other devotees, so Jīva Gosvāmī warns that this sort of mentality
should be corrected. A devotee should see that Kṛṣṇa is present in everyone’s
heart as Paramātmā; therefore every body is the embodiment or the temple of the
Supreme Lord, and as such, as one offers respect to the temple of the Lord, he
should similarly properly respect each and every body in whom the Paramātmā
dwells. Everyone should therefore be given proper respect and should not be
neglected.

There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They say that
since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to temple worship? But
if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in the Deity? Although the
personalist and the impersonalist will fight with one another perpetually, a
perfect devotee in Kṛṣṇa consciousness knows that although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Personality, He is all-pervading, as is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā.
Although His personal abode is Goloka Vṛndāvana and He is always staying there,
still, by His different manifestations of energy and by His plenary expansion,
He is present everywhere in all parts of the material and spiritual creation.

### 9.12


moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo

mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva

prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ

moghāśāḥ—baffled hope; mogha-karmāṇaḥ—baffled in fruitive activities;
mogha-jñānāḥ—baffled in knowledge; vicetasaḥ—bewildered; rākṣasīm—demonic;
āsurīm—atheistic; ca—and; eva—certainly; prakṛtim—nature; mohinīm—bewildering;
śritāḥ—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views. In
that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities,
and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

PURPORT

There are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and
devotional service but at heart do not accept the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, as the Absolute Truth. For them, the fruit of devotional
service—going back to Godhead—will never be tasted. Similarly, those who are
engaged in fruitive, pious activities and who are ultimately hoping to be
liberated from this material entanglement will never be successful either
because they deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. In other words,
persons who mock Kṛṣṇa are to be understood to be demonic or atheistic. As
described in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, such demonic miscreants never
surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore their mental speculations to arrive at the
Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the ordinary living
entity and Kṛṣṇa are one and the same. With such a false conviction, they think
that the body of any human being is now simply covered by material nature and
that as soon as one is liberated from this material body there is no difference
between God and himself. This attempt to become one with Kṛṣṇa will be baffled
because of delusion. Such atheistic and demoniac cultivation of spiritual
knowledge is always futile. That is the indication of this verse. For such
persons, cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedic literature, like the
Vedānta-sūtra and the Upaniṣads, is always baffled.

It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so are certainly deluded because
they cannot understand the eternal form of Kṛṣṇa. In the Bṛhad-vaiṣṇava mantra
it is clearly stated that one who considers the body of Kṛṣṇa to be material
should be driven out from all rituals and activities of the śruti. And if one by
chance sees his face, he should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself
of infection. People jeer at Kṛṣṇa because they are envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth after birth in
the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, their real knowledge
will remain under delusion, and gradually they will regress to the darkest
region of creation.

### 9.13


mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

mahātmānaḥ—the great souls; tu—but; mām—unto Me; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
daivīm—divine; prakṛtim—nature; āśritāḥ—taken shelter of; bhajanti—render
service; ananya-manasaḥ—without deviation of the mind; jñātvā—knowing;
bhūta—creation; ādim—original; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O son of Pṛthā, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible.

PURPORT

In this verse the description of mahātmā is clearly given. The first sign of the
mahātmā is that he is already situated in the divine nature. He is not under the
control of material nature. And how is this effected? That is explained in the
Seventh Chapter: one who surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, at once becomes freed from the control of material nature. That is the
qualification. One can become free from the control of material nature as soon
as he surrenders his soul to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the
preliminary formula. Being marginal potency, as soon as the living entity is
freed from the control of material nature, he is put under the guidance of the
spiritual nature. The guidance of the spiritual nature is called daivīṁ
prakṛtim, divine nature. So, when one is promoted in that way—by surrendering to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead—one attains to the stage of great soul,
mahātmā.

The mahātmā does not divert his attention to anything outside Kṛṣṇa because he
knows perfectly well that Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Person, the cause of all
causes. There is no doubt about it. Such a mahātmā, or great soul, develops
through association with other mahātmās, pure devotees. Pure devotees are not
even attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s other features, such as the four-armed Mahā-Viṣṇu.
They are simply attracted by the two-armed form of Kṛṣṇa. Since they are not
attracted to other features of Kṛṣṇa (what to speak of the demigods), they are
not concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being. They only meditate
upon Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are always engaged in the unswerving
service of the Lord in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
