### 9.14


satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate

satatam—always; kīrtayantaḥ—chanting; mām—Me; yatantaḥ ca—fully endeavoring
also; dṛḍha-vratāḥ—with determination; namasyantaḥ ca—offering obeisances;
mām—unto Me; bhaktyā—in devotion; nitya-yuktāḥ—perpetually engaged;
upāsate—worship.

**TRANSLATION**

Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down
before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion.

**PURPORT**

The mahātmā cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man. His
symptoms are described here: a mahātmā is always engaged in chanting the glories
of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead. He has no other business.
He is always engaged in the glorification of the Lord. In other words, he is not
an impersonalist. When the question of glorification is there, one has to
glorify the Supreme Lord, praising His holy name, His eternal form, His
transcendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One has to glorify all these
things; therefore a mahātmā is attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, the
brahmajyoti, is not described as mahātmā in the Bhagavad-gītā. He is described
in a different way in the next verse. The mahātmā is always engaged in different
activities of devotional service, as described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, hearing
and chanting about Viṣṇu, not a demigod or human being. That is devotion:
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, smaraṇam, and remembering Him. Such a mahātmā has firm
determination to achieve at the ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord
in any one of the five transcendental rasas. To achieve that success, he engages
all activities—mental, bodily and vocal, everything—in the service of the
Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. That is called full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

In devotional service there are certain activities which are called determined,
such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day of the moon, Ekādaśī, and
on the appearance day of the Lord, etc. All these rules and regulations are
offered by the great ācāryas for those who are actually interested in getting
admission into the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
transcendental world. The mahātmās, great souls, strictly observe all these
rules and regulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve the desired
result.

As described in the second verse of this chapter, this devotional service is not
only easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. One does not need to undergo
any severe penance and austerity. He can live this life in devotional service,
guided by an expert spiritual master, and in any position, either as a
householder or a sannyāsī, or a brahmacārī; in any position and anywhere in the
world, he can perform this devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and thus become actually mahātmā, a great soul.

### 9.15


jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye

yajanto mām upāsate

ekatvena pṛthaktvena

bahudhā viśvato-mukham

jñāna-yajñena—by cultivation of knowledge; ca—also; api—certainly; anye—others;
yajantaḥ—worshiping; mām—Me; upāsate—worship; ekatvena—in oneness;
pṛthaktvena—in duality; bahudhā—diversity; viśvataḥ-mukham—in the universal
form.

**TRANSLATION**

Others, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the Supreme
Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in the universal form.

**PURPORT**

This verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna that
those who are purely in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and do not know anything other than
Kṛṣṇa are called mahātmā; yet there are other persons who are not exactly in the
position of mahātmā but who worship Kṛṣṇa also, in different ways. Some of them
are already described as the distressed, the financially destitute, the
inquisitive, and those who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. But
there are others who are still lower, and these are divided into three: 1) He
who worships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, 2) He who concocts some form
of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and 3) He who accepts the universal form,
the viśvarūpa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worships that. Out of
the above three, the lowest, those who worship themselves as the Supreme Lord,
thinking themselves to be monists, are most predominant. Such people think
themselves to be the Supreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship
themselves. This is also a type of God worship, for they can understand that
they are not the material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such a
sense is prominent. Generally the impersonalists worship the Supreme Lord in
this way. The second class includes the worshipers of the demigods, those who by
imagination consider any form to be the form of the Supreme Lord. And the third
class includes those who cannot conceive of anything beyond the manifestation of
this material universe. They consider the universe to be the supreme organism or
entity and worship that. The universe is also a form of the Lord.

### 9.16


ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ

svadhāham aham auṣadham

mantro ’ham aham evājyam

aham agnir ahaṁ hutam

aham—I; kratuḥ—ritual; aham—I; yajñaḥ—sacrifice; svadhā—oblation; aham—I ;
aham—I; auṣadham—healing herb ; mantraḥ—transcendental chant; aham—I; aham—I;
eva—certainly; ajyam—melted butter; aham—I; agniḥ—fire; aham—I; hutam—offering.

**TRANSLATION**

But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors,
the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter and the fire and the
offering.

**PURPORT**

The sacrifice known as jyotiṣṭoma is also Kṛṣṇa, and He is also the mahā-yajña
The oblations offered to the Pitṛloka or the sacrifice performed to please the
Pitṛloka, considered as a kind of drug in the form of clarified butter, is also
Kṛṣṇa. The mantras chanted in this connection are also Kṛṣṇa. And many other
commodities made with milk products for offering in the sacrifices are also
Kṛṣṇa. The fire is also Kṛṣṇa because fire is one of the five material elements
and is therefore claimed as the separated energy of Kṛṣṇa. In other words, the
Vedic sacrifices recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa division of the Vedas are in
total also Kṛṣṇa. Or, in other words, those who are engaged in rendering
devotional service unto Kṛṣṇa are to be understood to have performed all the
sacrifices recommended in the Vedas.

### 9.17


pitāham asya jagato

mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥ

vedyaṁ pavitram oṁkāra

ṛk sāma yajur eva ca

pitā—father; aham—I; asya—of this; jagataḥ—of the universe; mātā—mother;
dhātā—supporter; pitāmahaḥ—grandfather; vedyam—what is to be known;
pavitram—that which purifies; omkāraḥ—the syllable om; ṛk—the Ṛg-veda; sāma—the
Sāma-veda; yajuḥ—the Yajur-veda; eva—certainly; ca—and.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the grandsire. I
am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable om. I am also the Ṛk,
the Sāma, and the Yajur [Vedas].

**PURPORT**

The entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested by
different activities of Kṛṣṇa’s energy. In the material existence we create
different relationships with different living entities who are nothing but
Kṛṣṇa’s marginal energy, but under the creation of prakṛti some of them appear
as our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc., but actually they are parts
and parcels of Kṛṣṇa. As such, these living entities who appear to be our
father, mother, etc., are nothing but Kṛṣṇa. In this verse the word dhātā means
creator. Not only are our father and mother parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa, but
their creator, grandmother, and grandfather, etc., are also Kṛṣṇa. Actually any
living entity, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, is Kṛṣṇa. All the Vedas,
therefore, aim only toward Kṛṣṇa. Whatever we want to know through the Vedas is
but a progressive step to understand Kṛṣṇa. That subject matter which helps us
purify our constitutional position is especially Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, the living
entity who is inquisitive to understand all Vedic principles is also part and
parcel of Kṛṣṇa and as such is also Kṛṣṇa. In all the Vedic mantras the word om,
called praṇava, is a transcendental sound vibration and is also Kṛṣṇa. And
because in all the hymns of the four Vedas, Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva, the
praṇava or omkāra is very prominent, it is understood to be Kṛṣṇa.

### 9.18


gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī

nivāsaḥ śaraṇaṁ suhṛt

prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ

nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam

gatiḥ—goal; bhartā—sustainer; prabhuḥ—Lord; sākṣī—witness; nivāsaḥ—abode;
śaraṇam—refuge; suhṛt—most intimate friend; prabhavaḥ—creation;
pralayaḥ—dissolution; sthānam—ground; nidhānam—resting place; bījam—seed;
avyayam—imperishable.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge and
the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of
everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.

**PURPORT**

Gati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal is Kṛṣṇa,
although people do not know it. One who does not know Kṛṣṇa is misled, and his
so-called progressive march is either partial or hallucinatory. There are many
who make as their destination different demigods, and by rigid performance of
the strict respective methods they reach different planets known as Candraloka,
Sūryaloka, Indraloka, Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas or planets, being
creations of Kṛṣṇa, are simultaneously Kṛṣṇa and not Kṛṣṇa. Actually such
planets, being the manifestations of Kṛṣṇa’s energy, are also Kṛṣṇa, but
actually they only serve as a step forward for realization of Kṛṣṇa. To approach
the different energies of Kṛṣṇa is to approach Kṛṣṇa indirectly. One should
directly approach Kṛṣṇa, for that will save time and energy. For example, if
there is a possibility of going to the top of a building by the help of an
elevator, why should one go by the staircase, step by step? Everything is
resting on Kṛṣṇa’s energy; therefore without Kṛṣṇa’s shelter nothing can exist.
Kṛṣṇa is the supreme ruler because everything belongs to Him and everything
exists on His energy. Kṛṣṇa, being situated in everyone’s heart, is the supreme
witness. The residences, countries or planets on which we live are also Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal of shelter, and as such one should take shelter of
Kṛṣṇa either for protection or for annihilation of his distressed condition. And
whenever we have to take protection, we should know that our protection must be
a living force. Thus Kṛṣṇa is the supreme living entity. Since Kṛṣṇa is the
source of our generation, or the supreme father, no one can be a better friend
than Kṛṣṇa, nor can anyone be a better well-wisher. Kṛṣṇa is the original source
of creation and the ultimate rest after annihilation. Kṛṣṇa is therefore the
eternal cause of all causes.

### 9.19


tapāmy aham ahaṁ varṣaṁ

nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi ca

amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca

sad asac cāham arjuna

tapāmi—give heat; aham—I; aham—I; varṣam—rain; nigṛhṇāmi—withold; utsṛjāmi—send
forth; ca—and; amṛtam—immortality; ca—and; eva—certainly; mṛtyuḥ—death; ca—and;
sat—being; asat—nonbeing; ca—and; aham—I; arjuna—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

O Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality, and I am
also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are in Me.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the agency of
electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Kṛṣṇa who checks rain from
falling from the sky, and then, during the rainy season, He gives unceasing
torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us by prolonging the duration of our
life is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa meets us at the end as death. By analyzing all these
different energies of Kṛṣṇa, one can acertain that for Kṛṣṇa there is no
distinction between matter and spirit, or, in other words, He is both matter and
spirit. In the advanced stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one does not therefore
make such distinctions. He sees Kṛṣṇa only in everything.

Since Kṛṣṇa is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form comprising
all material manifestations is also Kṛṣṇa, and His pastimes in Vṛndāvana as
two-handed Śyāmasundara, playing on a flute, are those of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.


### 9.20


trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā

yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante

te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam

aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān

trai-vidyāḥ—the knowers of the three Vedas; mām—unto Me; soma-pāḥ—drinkers of
soma juice; pūta—purified; pāpāḥ—sins; yajñaiḥ—with sacrifices; iṣṭvā—after
worshiping; svargatim—passage to heaven; prārthayante—pray; te—they;
puṇyam—virtue; āsādya—enjoying; surendra—of Indra; lokam—world; aśnanti—enjoy;
divyān—celestial; divi—in heaven; deva-bhogān—pleasures of the gods.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly
planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planet of Indra, where
they enjoy godly delights.

**PURPORT**

The word trai-vidyāḥ refers to the three Vedas, Sāma, Yajur and Ṛg. A brāhmaṇa
who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedī. Anyone who is very much
attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas is respected in society.
Unfortunately, there are many great scholars of the Vedas who do not know the
ultimate purport of studying them. Therefore Kṛṣṇa herein declares Himself to be
the ultimate goal for the tri-vedīs. Actual tri-vedīs take shelter under the
lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord.
Devotional service begins with the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and side by
side trying to understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Unfortunately those who are simply
official students of the Vedas become more interested in offering sacrifices to
the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc. By such endeavor, the worshipers
of different demigods are certainly purified of the contamination of the lower
qualities of nature and are thereby elevated to the higher planetary system or
heavenly planets known as Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on
those higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of thousands
of times better than on this planet.

Devotional service begins with the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and side by
side trying to understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Unfortunately those who are simply
official students of the Vedas become more interested in offering sacrifices to
the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc. By such endeavor, the worshipers
of different demigods are certainly purified of the contamination of the lower
qualities of nature and are thereby elevated to the higher planetary system or
heavenly planets known as Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on
those higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of thousands
of times better than on this planet.
