### 9.21


te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

te—they; tam—that; bhuktvā—enjoying; svarga-lokam—heaven; viśālam—vast;
kṣīṇe—being exhausted; puṇye—merits; martya-lokam—mortal earth; viśanti—fall
down; evam—thus; trayī—three Vedas; dharmam—doctrines; anuprapannāḥ—following;
gata-agatam—death and birth; kāma-kāmāḥ—desiring sense enjoyments;
labhante—attain.

**TRANSLATION**

When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to this mortal
planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, they achieve only flickering
happiness.

**PURPORT**

One who is promoted to those higher planetary systems enjoys a longer duration
of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is not allowed to
stay there forever. One is again sent back to this earthly planet upon finishing
the resultant fruits of pious activities. He who has not attained perfection of
knowledge, as indicated in the Vedānta-sūtra (janmādy asya yataḥ), or, in other
words, he who fails to understand Kṛṣṇa, the cause of all causes, becomes
baffled in achieving the ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the
routine of being promoted to the higher planets and then again coming down, as
if situated on a ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comes down.
The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritual world where there
is no longer any possibility of coming down, one simply revolves in the cycle of
birth and death on higher and lower planetary systems. One should better take to
the spiritual world to enjoy eternal life full of bliss and knowledge and never
return to this miserable material existence.

### 9.22


ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

ananyāḥ—no other; cintayantaḥ—concentrating; mām—unto Me; ye—who; janāḥ—persons;
paryupāsate—properly worship; teṣām—their; nitya—always abhiyuktānām—fixed in
devotion; yoga-kṣemam—requirements; vahāmi—carry; aham—I.

**TRANSLATION**

But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental form—to
them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have.

**PURPORT**

One who is unable to live for a moment without Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot but
think of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours, being engaged in devotional service by
hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers, worshiping, serving the lotus
feet of the Lord, rendering other services, cultivating friendship and
surrendering fully to the Lord. Such activities are all auspicious and full of
spiritual potencies; indeed, they make the devotee perfect in self-realization.
Then his only desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a devotee never
comes back to this material condition of life. Kṣema refers to the merciful
protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee to achieve Kṛṣṇa
consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Kṛṣṇa conscious the Lord
protects him from falling down to a miserable conditioned life.

### 9.23


ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te ’pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam

ye—those; api—also; anya—other; devatā—demigods; bhaktāḥ—devotees;
yajante—worship; śraddhaya-anvitāḥ—with faith; te—they; api—also; mām—Me;
eva—even; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; yajanti—sacrifice; avidhi-pūrvakam—in a wrong
way.

**TRANSLATION**

Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kuntī, is really meant for
Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.

**PURPORT**

“Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very intelligent,
although such worship is done to Me indirectly,” Kṛṣṇa says. For example, when a
man pours water on the leaves and branches of a tree without pouring water on
the root, he does so without sufficient knowledge or without observing
regulative principles. Similarly, the process of rendering service to different
parts of the body is to supply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to
speak, different officers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord.
One has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers or
directors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme Lord only.
That will automatically satisfy the different officers and directors of the
Lord. The officers and directors are engaged as representatives of the
government, and to offer some bribe to the officers and directors is illegal.
This is stated here as avidhi-pūrvakam. In other words, Kṛṣṇa does not approve
the unnecessary worship of the demigods.

### 9.24


ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ

bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca

na tu mām abhijānanti

tattvenātaś cyavanti te

aham—I; hi—surely; sarva—of all; yajñānām—sacrifices; bhoktā—enjoyer; ca—and;
prabhuḥ—Lord; eva—also; ca—and; na—not; tu—but; mām—Me; abhijānanti—know;
tattvena—in reality; ataḥ—therefore; cyavanti—fall down; te—they.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do not
recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.

**PURPORT**

Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajña performances
recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of them are meant for
satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajña means Viṣṇu. In the Second Chapter of
Bhagavad-gītā it is clearly stated that one should only work for satisfying
Yajña or Viṣṇu. The perfectional form of human civilization, known as
varṇāśrama-dharma, is specifically meant for satisfying Viṣṇu. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa
says in this verse, “I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme
master.” However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worship
demigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material existence
and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however, anyone has any
material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray for it to the Supreme Lord
(although that is not pure devotion), and he will thus achieve the desired
result.

### 9.25


yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

yānti—achieve; deva-vratāḥ—worshipers of demigods; devān—to demigods; pitṝn—to
ancestors; yānti—go; pitṛ-vratāḥ—worshipers of ancestors; bhūtāni—to ghosts and
spirits; yānti—go; bhūtejyāḥ—worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yānti—go; mat—My;
yājinaḥ—devotees; api—also; mām—unto Me.

**TRANSLATION**

Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who
worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship
ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me.

**PURPORT**

If anyone has any desire to go to the moon, the sun, or any other planet, one
can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedic principles
recommended for that purpose. These are vividly described in the fruitive
activities portion of the Vedas, technically known as darśa-paurṇamāsī, which
recommends a specific worship of demigods situated on different heavenly
planets. Similarly, one can attain the pitā planets by performing a specific
yajña. Similarly, one can go to many ghostly planets and become a yakṣa, rakṣa
or piśāca. Piśāca worship is called “black arts” or “black magic.” There are
many men who practice this black art, and they think that it is spiritualism,
but such activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a pure devotee, who
worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achieves the planets of
Vaikuṇṭha and Kṛṣṇaloka without a doubt. It is very easy to understand through
this important verse that if by simply worshiping the demigods one can achieve
the heavenly planets, or by worshiping the pitā achieve the pitā planets, or by
practicing the black arts achieve the ghostly planets, why can the pure devotee
not achieve the planet of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu? Unfortunately many people have no
information of these sublime planets where Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu live, and because
they do not know of them they fall down. Even the impersonalists fall down from
the brahmajyoti. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore distributing
sublime information to the entire human society to the effect that by simply
chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra one can become perfect in this life and go back
home, back to Godhead.

### 9.26


patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

patram—a leaf; puṣpam—a flower; phalam—a fruit; toyam—water; yaḥ—whoever;
me—unto Me; bhaktyā—with devotion; prayacchati—offers; tat—that; aham—I;
bhakti-upahṛtam—offered in devotion; aśnāmi—accept; prayata-ātmanaḥ—of one in
pure consciousness.

**TRANSLATION**

If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit a water, I will
accept it.

**PURPORT**

Here Lord Kṛṣṇa, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the primeval
Lord, and the real object of all sacrificial offerings, reveals what types of
sacrifices He desires to be offered. If one wishes to engage in devotional
service to the Supreme in order to be purified and to reach the goal of life—the
transcendental loving service of God—then he should find out what the Lord
desires of him. One who loves Kṛṣṇa will give Him whatever He wants, and he
avoids offering anything which is undesirable or unasked for. Thus, meat, fish
and eggs should not be offered to Kṛṣṇa. If He desired such things as offerings,
He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, fruit, flowers
and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering, “I will accept it.”
Therefore, we should understand that He will not accept meat, fish and eggs.
Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and water are the proper foods for human beings
and are prescribed by Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. Whatever else we eat cannot be offered
to Him, since He will not accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the level of
loving devotion if we offer such foods.

In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Śrī Kṛṣṇa explains that only the remains
of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those who are seeking
advancement in life and release from the clutches of the material entanglement.
Those who do not make an offering of their food, He says in the same verse, are
said to be eating only sin. In other words, their every mouthful is simply
deepening their involvement in the complexities of material nature. But
preparing nice, simple vegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or
Deity of Lord Kṛṣṇa and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humble
offering, enable one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body, and to
create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking. Above all, the
offering should be made with an attitude of love. Kṛṣṇa has no need of food,
since He already possesses everything that be, yet He will accept the offering
of one who desires to please Him in that way. The important element, in
preparation, in serving and in offering, is to act with love for Kṛṣṇa.

The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the Absolute Truth is
without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gītā. To them, it is
either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character of Kṛṣṇa, the speaker of the
Gītā. But, in actuality, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Godhead, has senses, and it is
stated that His senses are interchangeable; in other words, one sense can
perform the function of any other. This is what it means to say that Kṛṣṇa is
absolute. Lacking senses, He could hardly be considered full in all opulences.
In the Seventh Chapter, Kṛṣṇa has explained that He impregnates the living
entities into material nature. This is done by His looking upon material nature.
And so in this instance, Kṛṣṇa’s hearing the devotee’s words of love in offering
foodstuffs is wholly identical with His eating and actually tasting. This point
should be emphasized: because of His absolute position, His hearing is wholly
identical with His eating and tasting. Only the devotee, who accepts Kṛṣṇa as He
describes Himself, without interpretation, can understand that the Supreme
Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.
