### 9.27


yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

yat—what; karoṣi—you do; yat—whatever; aśnāsi—you eat; yat—whatever; juhoṣi—you
offer; dadāsi—you give away; yat—whatever; yat—whatever; tapasyasi—austerities
you perform; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; tat—that; kuruṣva—make; mat—unto Me;
arpaṇam—offering.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Kuntī, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an
offering unto Me.

**PURPORT**

Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will not
forget Kṛṣṇa in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for maintenance of his
body and soul together, and Kṛṣṇa recommends herein that one should work for
Him. Everyone has to eat something to live; therefore he should accept the
remnants of foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa. Any civilized man has to perform some
religious ritualistic ceremonies; therefore Kṛṣṇa recommends, “Do it for Me,”
and this is called arcanā. Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity;
Kṛṣṇa says, “Give it to Me,” and this means that all surplus money accummulated
should be utilized in furthering the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Nowadays
people are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is not
practical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on Kṛṣṇa twenty-four
hours by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra round his beads, he is surely the
greatest yogī, as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā.

### 9.28


śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ

mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ

sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā

vimukto mām upaiṣyasi

śubha—good; aśubha—evil; phalaiḥ—results; evam—thus; mokṣyase—free;
karma—action; bandhanaiḥ—bondage; sannyāsa—of renunciation; yoga—the yoga;
yukta-ātmā—having the mind firmly set on; vimuktaḥ—liberated; mām—to Me;
upaiṣyasi—you will attain.

**TRANSLATION**

In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil deeds, and by
this principle of renunciation you will be liberated and come to Me.

**PURPORT**

One who acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness under superior direction is called yukta.
The technical term is yukta-vairāgya. This is further explained by Rūpa Gosvāmī
as follows.

Rūpa Gosvāmī says that as long as we are in this material world we have to act;
we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed and the fruits are
given to Kṛṣṇa, then that is called yukta-vairāgya. Actually situated in
renunciation, such activities clear the mirror of the mind, and as the actor
gradually makes progress in spiritual realization he becomes completely
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he
becomes liberated, and this liberation is also specified. By this liberation he
does not become one with the brahmajyoti but rather enters into the planet of
the Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mām upaiṣyasi, “he comes to Me,”
back home, back to Godhead. There are five different stages of liberation, and
here it is specified that the devotee who has always lived his lifetime here
under the direction of the Supreme Lord, as stated, has evolved to the point
where he can, after quitting this body, go back to Godhead and engage directly
in the association of the Supreme Lord.

Anyone who has no other interest but to dedicate his life to the service of the
Lord is actually a sannyāsī Such a person always thinks of himself as an eternal
servant, dependant on the supreme will of the Lord. As such, whatever he does,
he does it for the benefit of the Lord. Whatever action he performs, he performs
it as service to the Lord. He does not give serious attention to the fruitive
activities or prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary persons it
is obligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas, but
although a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of the Lord may
sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties, actually it is not
so.

It is said, therefore, by Vaiṣṇava authorities that even the most intelligent
person cannot understand the plans and activities of a pure devotee. The exact
words are vaiṣṇavera kriyā mudrā vijñe nā bujhayā. A person who is thus always
engaged in the service of the Lord or is always thinking and planning how to
serve the Lord is to be considered completely liberated at present and in the
future. His going home, back to Godhead, is guaranteed. He is above all
materialistic criticism, just as Kṛṣṇa is above all criticism.

### 9.29


samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

samaḥ—equally disposed; aham—I; sarva-bhūteṣu—to all living entities; na—no one;
me—Mine; dveṣyaḥ—hateful; asti—is; na—nor; priyaḥ—dear; ye—those;
bhajanti—render transcendental service; tu—yet; mām—unto Me; bhaktyā—in
devotion; mayi—unto Me; te—such persons; teṣu—in them; ca—also; api—certainly;
aham—I.

**TRANSLATION**

I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him.

**PURPORT**

One may question here that if Kṛṣṇa is equal to everyone and no one is His
special friend, then why does He take a special interest in the devotees who are
always engaged in His transcendental service? But this is not discrimination; it
is natural. Any man in this material world may be very charitably disposed, yet
he has a special interest in his own children. The Lord claims that every living
entity—in whatever form—is His son, and as such He provides everyone with a
generous supply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which pours
rain all over, regardless whether it falls on rock or land or water. But for His
devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees are mentioned here: they
are always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and therefore they are always
transcendentally situated in Kṛṣṇa. The very phrase Kṛṣṇa consciousness suggests
that those who are in such consciousness are living transcendentalists, situated
in Him. The Lord says here distinctly, “mayi te,” “in Me.” Naturally, as a
result, the Lord is also in them. This is reciprocal. This also explains the
words: asti na priyaḥ/ye bhajanti: “Whoever surrenders unto Me, proportionately
I take care of him.” This transcendental reciprocation exists because both the
Lord and the devotee are conscious. When a diamond is set in a golden ring, it
looks very nice. The gold is glorified, and at the same time the diamond is
glorified. The Lord and the living entity eternally glitter, and when a living
entity becomes inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord, he looks like gold.
The Lord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice. Living entities in
a pure state are called devotees. The Supreme Lord becomes the devotee of His
devotees. If a reciprocal relationship is not present between the devotee and
the Lord, then there is no personalist philosophy. In the impersonal philosophy
there is no reciprocation between the Supreme and the living entity, but in the
personalist philosophy there is.

The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and whatever one
wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here the explanation is more
complete. The Lord is here stated to be partial to the devotees. This is the
manifestation of the Lord’s special mercy to the devotees. The Lord’s
reciprocation should not be considered to be under the law of karma. It belongs
to the transcendental situation in which the Lord and His devotees function.
Devotional service of the Lord is not an activity of this material world; it is
part of the spiritual world where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.

### 9.30


api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

api—in spite of; cet—although; sudurācāraḥ—one committing the most abominable
actions; bhajate—engaged in devotional service; mām—unto Me; ananya-bhāk—without
deviation; sādhuḥ—saint; eva—certainly; saḥ—he; mantavyaḥ—to be considered;
samyak—completely; vyavasitaḥ—situated; hi—certainly; saḥ—he.

**TRANSLATION**

Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in devotional
service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated.

**PURPORT**

The word sudurācāro used in this verse is very significant, and we should
understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he has two kinds of
activities: one is conditional, and the other is constitutional. As for
protecting the body or abiding by the rules of society and state, certainly
there are different activities, even for the devotees, in connection with the
conditional life, and such activities are called conditional. Besides these, the
living entity who is fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activities which
are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in his constitutional
position, and they are technically called devotional service. Now, in the
conditioned state, sometimes devotional service and the conditional service in
relation to the body will parallel one another. But then again, sometimes these
activities become opposed to one another. As far as possible, a devotee is very
cautious so that he does not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome
condition. He knows that perfection in his activities depends on his progressive
realization of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be seen that a
person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness commits some act which may be taken as most
abominable socially or politically. But such a temporary falldown does not
disqualify him. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that if a person falls
down, but is wholeheartedly engaged in the transcendental service of the Supreme
Lord, the Lord, being situated within his heart, beautifies him and excuses him
from that abomination. The material contamination is so strong that even a yogī
fully engaged in the service of the Lord sometimes becomes ensnared; but Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at once
rectified. Therefore the process of devotional service is always a success. No
one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldown from the ideal path,
for, as is explained in the next verse, such occasional falldowns will be
stopped in due course, as soon as a devotee is completely situated in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

Therefore a person who is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and is engaged with
determination in the process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare should be considered to be
in the transcendental position, even if by chance or accident he is found to
have fallen. The words sādhur eva, “he is saintly,” are very emphatic. They are
a warning to the nondevotees that because of an accidental falldown a devotee
should not be derided; he should still be considered saintly even if he has
fallen down accidentally. And the word mantavyaḥ is still more emphatic. If one
does not follow this rule, and derides a devotee for his accidental falldown,
then he is disobeying the order of the Supreme Lord. The only qualification of a
devotee is to be unflinchingly and exclusively engaged in devotional service.

The mark of a spot which may be seen on the moon does not become an impediment
to the moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of a devotee from the path
of a saintly character does not make him abominable. On the other hand, one
should not misunderstand that a devotee in transcendental devotional service can
act in all kinds of abominable ways; this verse only refers to an accident due
to the strong power of material connections. Devotional service is more or less
a declaration of war against the illusory energy. As long as one is not strong
enough to fight the illusory energy, there may be accidental falldowns. But when
one is strong enough, he is no longer subjected to such falldowns, as previously
explained. No one should take advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and
think that he is still a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by
devotional service, then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.

### 9.31


kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

kṣipram—very soon; bhavati—becomes; dharma-ātmā—righteous; śaśvat-śāntim—lasting
peace; nigacchati—attains; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; pratijānīhi—justly declare;
na—never; me—Mine; bhaktaḥ—devotee; praṇaśyati—perishes.

**TRANSLATION**

He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kuntī, declare
it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

**PURPORT**

This should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says that one
who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become a devotee of the Lord.
One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no good qualifications whatsoever. The
question remains, then, how can a person engaged in abominable activities—either
by accident or intention—be a pure devotee? This question may justly be raised.
The miscreants, as stated in the Seventh Chapter, who never come to the
devotional service of the Lord, have no good qualifications, as is stated in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Generally, a devotee who is engaged in the nine kinds of
devotional activities is engaged in the process of cleansing all material
contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme Personality of Godhead within
his heart, and all sinful contaminations are naturally washed away. Continuous
thinking of the Supreme Lord makes him pure by nature. According to the Vedas,
there is a certain regulation that if one falls down from his exalted position,
he has to undergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here
there is no such condition because the purifying process is already there in the
heart of the devotee, due to his remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead
constantly. Therefore, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare should be continued without
stoppage. This will protect a devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will
thus remain perpetually free from all material contaminations.

### 9.32


māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim

mām—unto Me; hi—certainly; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; vyapāśrītya—particularly
taking shelter; ye—anyone; api—also; syuḥ—becomes; pāpa-yonayaḥ—born of a lower
family; striyaḥ—women; vaiśyāḥ—mercantile people; tathā—also; śūdrāḥ—lower class
men; te api—even they; yānti—go; parām—supreme; gatim—destination.

**TRANSLATION**

O son of Pṛthā, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiśyas [merchants], as well as śūdras [workers]—can approach the
supreme destination.

**PURPORT**

It is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional service there
is no distinction between the lower or higher classes of people. In the material
conception of life, there are such divisions, but for a person engaged in
transcendental devotional service to the Lord, there are not. Everyone is
eligible for the supreme destination. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that
even the lowest, who are called caṇḍālas (dog-eaters), can be elevated by
association with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and guidance of a
pure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between the lower and
higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most simple man taking center
of the pure devotee can be purified by proper guidance. According to the
different modes of material nature, men are classified in the mode of goodness
(brāhmaṇas), the mode of passion (kṣatriyas, or administrators), the mixed modes
of passion and ignorance (vaiśyas, or merchants), and the mode of ignorance
(śūdras, or workers). Those lower than them are called caṇḍālas, and they are
born in sinful families. Generally, those who are born in sinful families are
not accepted by the higher classes. But the process of devotional service and
the pure devotee of the Supreme God are so strong that all the lower classes can
attain the highest perfection of life. This is possible only when one takes
center of Kṛṣṇa. One has to take center completely of Kṛṣṇa. Then one can become
much greater than great jñānīs and yogīs.
