### 9.33


kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā

bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā

anityam asukhaṁ lokam

imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

kim—how much; punaḥ—again; brāhmaṇāḥ—brāhmaṇas; puṇyāḥ—righteous;
bhaktāḥ—devotees; rājarṣayaḥ—saintly kings; tathā—also; anityam—temporary;
asukham—sorrowful; lokam—planets; imam—this; prāpya—gaining; bhajasva—are
engaged in loving service; mām—unto Me.

TRANSLATION

How much greater then are the brāhmaṇas, the righteous, the devotees and saintly
kings who in this temporary miserable world engage in loving service unto Me.

PURPORT

In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after all, this
world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly stated here, anityam
asukhaṁ lokam: this world is temporary and full of miseries, not habitable for
any sane gentleman. This world is declared by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to be temporary and full of miseries. Some of the philosophers, especially the
minor philosophers, say that this world is false, but we can understand from
Bhagavad-gītā that the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a
difference between temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there is
another world which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the other world is
eternal and blissful.

Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says, “Take to
My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, back home.” No one
should remain in this temporary world, full as it is with miseries. Everyone
should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that
he can be eternally happy. The devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the
only process by which all problems of all classes of men can be solved. Everyone
should therefore take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and make his life perfect.

### 9.34


man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam

ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

mat-manāḥ—always thinking of Me; bhava—become; mat—My; bhaktaḥ—devotee; mat—My;
yājī—worshiper; mām—unto Me; namaskuru—offer obeisances; mām—unto Me;
eva—completely; eṣyasi—come; yuktvā evam—being absorbed; ātmānam—your soul;
mat-parāyaṇaḥ—devoted to Me.

TRANSLATION

Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship Me.
Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the only means
of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminated material world.
Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaning of what is clearly
stated here: that all devotional service should be offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Unfortunately, unscrupulous commentators divert
the mind of the reader to that which is not at all feasible. Such commentators
do not know that there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa’s mind and Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is
not an ordinary human being; He is Absolute Truth. His body, mind and He Himself
are one and absolute. It is stated in the Kūrma Purāṇa, as it is quoted by
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī in his Anubhāṣya comments on
Caitanya-caritāmrta, Fifth Chapter, Ādi-līlā, verses 41–48, “deha-dehi-vibhedo
’yaṁ neśvare vidyate kvacit,” which means that there is no difference in Kṛṣṇa,
the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body. But, because they do not know
this science of Kṛṣṇa, the commentators hide Kṛṣṇa and divide His personality
from His mind or from His body. Although this is sheer ignorance of the science
of Kṛṣṇa, some men make profit out of misleading the people.

There are some who are demonic; they also think of Kṛṣṇa, but enviously, just
like King Kaṁsa, Kṛṣṇa’s uncle. He was also thinking of Kṛṣṇa always, but he
thought of Kṛṣṇa as his enemy. He was always in anxiety, wondering when Kṛṣṇa
would come to kill him. That kind of thinking will not help us. One should be
thinking of Kṛṣṇa in devotional love. That is bhakti. One should cultivate the
knowledge of Kṛṣṇa continually. What is that favorable cultivation? It is to
learn from a bona fide teacher. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
we have several times explained that His body is not material, but is eternal,
blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Kṛṣṇa will help one become a
devotee. Otherwise, understanding Kṛṣṇa from the wrong source will prove
fruitless.

One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primal form of
Kṛṣṇa; with conviction in his heart that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme, he should engage
himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands of temples in India for the
worship of Kṛṣṇa, and devotional service is practiced there. When such practice
is made, one has to offer obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. One should lower his head before
the Deity and engage his mind, his body, his activities—everything. That will
make one fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa without deviation. This will help one transfer
into the Kṛṣṇaloka. One should not be deviated by unscrupulous commentators. One
must engage in the nine different processes of devotional service, beginning
with hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa. Pure devotional service is the highest
achievement of human society.

In the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of Bhagavad-gītā, pure devotional service to
the Lord has been explained, apart from the yoga of knowledge and mystic yoga or
fruitive activities. Those who are not purely sanctified may be attracted by
different features of the Lord, like the impersonal brahmajyoti and localized
Paramātmā, but a pure devotee directly takes to the service of the Supreme Lord.

There is a beautiful poem about Kṛṣṇa in which it is clearly stated that any
person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is most unintelligent and
cannot achieve at any time the supreme award of Kṛṣṇa. The devotee, in the
beginning, may sometimes fall from the standard, but still he should be
considered superior to all other philosophers and yogīs. One who always engages
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be understood to be the perfect saintly person.
His accidental nondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon be
situated without any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has no
actual chance to fall down because the Supreme Godhead personally takes care of
His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person should take directly to
this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and happily live in this material world. He
will eventually receive the supreme award of Kṛṣṇa.


The Opulence of the Absolute

### 10.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

bhūya eva mahā-bāho

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

yat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya

vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhūyaḥ—again;
eva—certainly; mahā-bāho—O mighty-armed; śṛṇu—just hear; me—My; paramaṁ—supreme;
vacaḥ—information; yat—that which; te—to you; aham—I; prīyamāṇāya—thinking you
dear to Me; vakṣyāmi—say; hita-kāmyayā—for your benefit.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord said: My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen again to My
supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefit and which will give
you great joy.

PURPORT

The word paramam is explained thus by Parāśara Muni: one who is full in six
opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation, is paramam, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. While Kṛṣṇa was
present on this earth, He displayed all six opulences. Therefore great sages
like Parāśara Muni have all accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Now Kṛṣṇa is instructing Arjuna in more confidential knowledge of His
opulences and His work. Previously, beginning with the Seventh Chapter, the Lord
already explained His different energies and how they are acting. Now in this
chapter He explains His specific opulences to Arjuna. In the previous chapter he
has clearly explained His different energies to establish devotion in firm
conviction. Again in this chapter He tells Arjuna about His manifestations and
various opulences.

The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed in
devotional service. One should always hear about the Lord in the association of
devotees; that will enhance one’s devotional service. Discourses in the society
of devotees can take place only among those who are really anxious to be in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Others cannot take part in such discourses. The Lord
clearly tells Arjuna that because he is very dear to Him, for his benefit such
discourses are taking place.

### 10.2


na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ

prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ

aham ādir hi devānāṁ

maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ

na—never; me—My; viduḥ—knows; sura-gaṇāḥ—demigods; prabhavam—opulences;
na—never; maharṣayaḥ—great sages; aham—I am; ādiḥ—the origin; hi—certainly;
devānām—of the demigods; maharṣīṇām—of the great sages; ca—also; sarvaśaḥ—in all
respects.

TRANSLATION

Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin, for, in every
respect, I am the source of the demigods and the sages.

PURPORT

As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. No one is
greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is also stated by the
Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigods and sages. Even the
demigods and great sages cannot understand Kṛṣṇa; they can understand neither
His name nor His personality, so what is the position of the so-called scholars
of this tiny planet? No one can understand why this Supreme God comes to earth
as an ordinary human being and executes such commonplace and yet wonderful
activities. One should know, then, that scholarship is not the qualification
necessary to understand Kṛṣṇa. Even the demigods and the great sages have tried
to understand Kṛṣṇa by their mental speculation, and they have failed to do so.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also it is clearly said that even the great demigods
are not able to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They can
speculate to the limits of their imperfect senses and can reach the opposite
conclusion of impersonalism, of something not manifested by the three qualities
of material nature, or they can imagine something by mental speculation, but it
is not possible to understand Kṛṣṇa by such foolish speculation.

Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the Absolute Truth,
“Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am the Supreme.” One
should know this. Although one cannot understand the inconceivable Lord who is
personally present, He nonetheless exists. We can actually understand Kṛṣṇa, who
is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, simply by studying His words in
Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The impersonal Brahman can be conceived by
persons who are already in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the Personality
of Godhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendental position.

Because most men cannot understand Kṛṣṇa in His actual situation, out of His
causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators. Yet despite the
Supreme Lord’s uncommon activities, these speculators, due to contamination in
the material energy, still think that the impersonal Brahman is the Supreme.
Only the devotees who are fully surrendered unto the Supreme Lord can
understand, by the grace of the Supreme Personality, that He is Kṛṣṇa. The
devotees of the Lord do not bother about the impersonal Brahman conception of
God; their faith and devotion bring them to surrender immediately unto the
Supreme Lord, and out of the causeless mercy of Kṛṣṇa, they can understand
Kṛṣṇa. No one else can understand Him. So even great sages agree: What is ātmā,
what is the Supreme? It is He whom we have to worship.

### 10.3


yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca

vetti loka-maheśvaram

asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu

sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate

yaḥ—anyone; mām—unto Me; ajam—unborn; anādim—without beginning; ca—also;
vetti—knows; loka—the planets; maheśvaram—supreme master; asaṁmūḍhaḥ—without
doubt; saḥ—he; martyeṣu—among those subject to death; sarva-pāpaiḥ—from all
sinful reactions; pramucyate—is delivered.

TRANSLATION

He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord of all
the worlds—he, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.

PURPORT

As stated in the Seventh Chapter, those who are trying to elevate themselves to
the platform of spiritual realization are not ordinary men. They are superior to
millions and millions of ordinary men who have no knowledge of spiritual
realization, but out of those actually trying to understand their spiritual
situation, one who can come to the understanding that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the proprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most
successful spiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fully
understood Kṛṣṇa’s supreme position, can one be free completely from all sinful
reactions.

Here the word ajam, meaning unborn, should not be confused with the living
entities, who are described in the Second Chapter as ajam. The Lord is different
from the living entities who are taking birth and dying due to material
attachment. The conditional souls are changing their bodies, but His body is not
changeable. Even when He comes to this material world, He comes as the same
unborn; therefore in the Fourth Chapter it is said that the Lord, by His
internal potency, is not under the inferior material energy, but is always in
the superior energy.

He was existing before the creation, and He is different from His creation. All
the demigods were created within this material world, but as far as Kṛṣṇa is
concerned, it is said that He is not created; therefore Kṛṣṇa is different even
from the great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva. And because He is the creator of
Brahmā, Śiva and all the other demigods, He is the Supreme Person of all
planets.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is therefore different from everything that is created, and anyone who
knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from all sinful reaction. One
must be liberated from all sinful activities to be in the knowledge of the
Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can He be known and not by any other
means, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā.
