### 10.8


ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

aham—I; sarvasya—of all; prabhavaḥ—source of generation; mattaḥ—from Me;
sarvam—everything; pravartate—emanates; iti—thus; matvā—knowing;
bhajante—becomes devoted; mām—unto Me; budhāḥ—learned; bhāva-samanvitāḥ—with
great attention.

**TRANSLATION**

I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from
Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in My devotional service and worship
Me with all their hearts.

**PURPORT**

A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has information from
authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how to apply these teachings can
understand that Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything in both the material and
spiritual worlds, and because he knows this perfectly he becomes firmly fixed in
the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. He can never be deviated by any
amount of nonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic literature agrees that
Kṛṣṇa is the source of Brahmā, Śiva and all other demigods. In the Atharva-veda
it is said, “yo brahmāṇaṁ vidadhāti: pūrvaṁ yo vai vedāṁś ca gāpayati sma
kṛṣṇaḥ.” “It was Kṛṣṇa who in the beginning instructed Brahmā in Vedic knowledge
and who disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past.” Then again it is said, “atha
puruṣo ha vai nārāyaṇo ’kāmayata prajāḥ sṛjeya ity upakramya.” “Then the Supreme
Personality Nārāyaṇa desired to create living entities.” Again it is said:

nārāyaṇād brahmā jāyate, nārāyaṇād prajāpatiḥ prajāyate, nārāyaṇād indro jāyate,
nārāyaṇād aṣṭau vasavo jāyante, nārāyaṇād ekādaśa rudrā jāyante, nārāyaṇād
dvādaśādityāḥ.

“From Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā is born, and from Nārāyaṇa, the patriarchs are also born.
From Nārāyaṇa, Indra is born, from Nārāyaṇa the eight Vasus are born, from
Nārāyaṇa the eleven Rudras are born, from Nārāyaṇa the twelve Ādityas are born.”

It is said in the same Vedas: brahmaṇyo devakī-putraḥ: “The son of Devakī,
Kṛṣṇa, is the Supreme Personality.” Then it is said:

eko vai nārāyaṇa āsīn na brahmā na īśāno nāpo nāgni samau neme dyāv-āpṛthivī na
nakṣatrāṇi na sūryaḥ sa ekākī na ramate tasya dhyānāntaḥ sthasya yatra
chāndogaiḥ kriyamāṇāṣṭakādi-saṁjñakā stuti-stomaḥ stomam ucyate.

“In the beginning of the creation there was only the Supreme Personality
Nārāyaṇa. There was no Brahmā, no Śiva, no fire, no moon, no stars in the sky,
no sun. There was only Kṛṣṇa, who creates all and enjoys all.”

In the many Purāṇas it is said that Lord Śiva was born from the highest, the
Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, and the Vedas say that it is the Supreme Lord, the creator
of Brahmā and Śiva, who is to be worshiped. In the Mokṣa-dharma Kṛṣṇa also says,
prajāpatiṁ ca rudraṁ cāpy aham eva sṛjāmi vai tau hi māṁ na vijānīto mama
māyā-vimohitau. “The patriarchs, Śiva and others are created by Me, though they
do not know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by My illusory
energy.” In Varāha Purāṇa it is also said, nārāyaṇaḥ paro devas tasmāj jātaś
caturmukhaḥ tasmād rudro ’bhavad devaḥ sa ca sarvajñatāṁ gataḥ. “Nārāyaṇa is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahmā was born, from whom Śiva was
born.”

Lord Kṛṣṇa is the source of all generations, and He is called the most efficient
cause of everything. He says that because “everything is born of Me, I am the
original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one is above Me.” There is no
supreme controller other than Kṛṣṇa. One who understands Kṛṣṇa in such a way
from a bona fide spiritual master and from Vedic literature, who engages all his
energy in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, becomes a truly learned man. In comparison to
him, all others, who do not know Kṛṣṇa properly, are but fools. Only a fool
would consider Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary man. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person should not
be bewildered by fools; he should avoid all unauthorized commentaries and
interpretations on Bhagavad-gītā and proceed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness with
determination and firmness.

### 10.9


mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā

bodhayantaḥ parasparam

kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca

mat-cittāḥ—minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-prāṇāḥ—lives devoted to the
service of Kṛṣṇa; bodhayantaḥ—preaching; parasparam—among themselves;
kathayantaḥ ca—talking also; mām—about Me; nityam—perpetually; tuṣyanti—are
pleased; ca—also; ramanti—enjoy transcendental bliss; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are surrendered to Me,
and they derive great satisfaction and bliss enlightening one another and
conversing about Me.

**PURPORT**

Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage themselves fully
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Their minds cannot be diverted
from the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Their talks are solely on the transcendental
subjects. The symptoms of the pure devotees are described in this verse
specifically. Devotees of the Supreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged
in glorifying the pastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are
constantly submerged in Kṛṣṇa, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with
other devotees.

In the preliminary stage of devotional service they relish the transcendental
pleasure from the service itself, and in the mature stage they are actually
situated in love of God. Once situated in that transcendental position, they can
relish the highest perfection which is exhibited by the Lord in His abode. Lord
Caitanya likens transcendental devotional service to the sowing of a seed in the
heart of the living entity. There are innumerable living entities traveling
throughout the different planets of the universe, and out of them there are a
few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get the chance to
understand devotional service. This devotional service is just like a seed, and
if it is sown in the heart of a living entity, and if he goes on hearing and
chanting, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma,
Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, that seed fructifies, just as the seed of a tree
fructifies with regular watering. The spiritual plant of devotional service
gradually grows and grows until it penetrates the covering of the material
universe and enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual sky. In the
spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches the highest
planet, which is called Goloka Vṛndāvana, the supreme planet of Kṛṣṇa.
Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and rests
there. Gradually, as a plant grows fruits and flowers, that plant of devotional
service also produces fruits, and the watering process in the form of chanting
and hearing goes on. This plant of devotional service is fully described in the
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. It is explained there that when the complete plant takes
shelter under the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, one becomes fully absorbed in
love of God; then he cannot live even for a moment without being in contact with
the Supreme Lord, just as a fish cannot live without water. In such a state, the
devotee actually attains the transcendental qualities in contact with the
Supreme Lord.

The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is also full of such narration about the relationship
between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
very dear to the devotees. In this narration there is nothing about material
activities, sense gratification or liberation. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the only
narration in which the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His
devotees is fully described. Thus the realized souls in Kṛṣṇa consciousness take
continual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just as a young
boy and girl take pleasure in association.


### 10.10


teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

teṣām—unto them; satata-yuktānām—always engaged; bhajatām—in devotional service;
prīti-pūrvakam—in loving ecstasy; dadāmi—I give; buddhi-yogam—real intelligence;
tam—that; yena—by which; mām—unto Me; upayānti—come; te—they.

**TRANSLATION**

To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me.

**PURPORT**

In this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may remember that in
the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, said that He had spoken to him
of many things and that He would instruct him in the way of buddhi-yoga. Now
buddhi-yoga is explained. Buddhi-yogam itself is action in Kṛṣṇa consciousness;
that is the highest intelligence. Buddhi means intelligence, and yogam means
mystic activities or mystic elevation. When one tries to go back home, back to
Godhead, and takes fully to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service, his
action is called buddhi-yogam. In other words, buddhi-yogam is the process by
which one gets out of the entanglement of this material world. The ultimate goal
of progress is Kṛṣṇa. People do not know this; therefore the association of
devotees and a bona fide spiritual master are important. One should know that
the goal is Kṛṣṇa, and when the goal is assigned, then the path is slowly but
progressively traversed, and the ultimate goal is achieved.

When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits of
activities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal is Kṛṣṇa,
but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understand Kṛṣṇa, he is acting
in jñāna-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeks Kṛṣṇa completely in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and devotional service, he is acting in bhakti-yoga, or
buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. This complete yoga is the highest
perfectional stage of life.

A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to a
spiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough to make
progress, then Kṛṣṇa from within gives him instructions so that he may
ultimately come to Him without difficulty. The qualification is that a person
always engage himself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and with love and devotion render
all kinds of services. He should perform some sort of work for Kṛṣṇa, and that
work should be with love. If a devotee is intelligent enough, he will make
progress on the path of self-realization. If one is sincere and devoted to the
activities of devotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress
and ultimately attain to Him.

### 10.11


teṣām evānukampārtham

aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho

jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā

teṣām—for them; eva—certainly; anukampā-artham—to show special mercy; aham—I;
ajñāna-jam—due to ignorance; tamaḥ—darkness; nāśayāmi—dispel; ātma—within;
bhāvasthaḥ—themselves; jñāna—of knowledge; dīpena—with the lamp;
bhāsvatā—glowing.

**TRANSLATION**

Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the
shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

**PURPORT**

When Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare,
thousands of people were following Him. Prakāśānanda, a very influential and
learned scholar in Benares at that time, derided Lord Caitanya for being a
sentimentalist. Sometimes philosophers criticize the devotees because they think
that most of the devotees are in the darkness of ignorance and are
philosophically naive sentimentalists. Actually that is not the fact. There are
very, very learned scholars who have put forward the philosophy of devotion, but
even if a devotee does not take advantage of their literatures or of his
spiritual master, if he is sincere in his devotional service he is helped by
Kṛṣṇa Himself within his heart. So the sincere devotee engaged in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness cannot be without knowledge. The only qualification is that one
carry out devotional service in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot have pure
knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord: those who are
engaged in pure devotional service, even though they be without sufficient
education and even without sufficient knowledge of the Vedic principles, are
still helped by the Supreme God, as stated in this verse.

The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility of understanding
the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth is so great that it is not possible
to understand Him or to achieve Him simply by making a mental effort. Man can go
on speculating for several millions of years, and if he is not devoted, if he is
not a lover of the Supreme Truth, he will never understand Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme
Truth. Only by devotional service is the Supreme Truth, Kṛṣṇa, pleased, and by
His inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of the pure devotee.
The pure devotee always has Kṛṣṇa within his heart; therefore he is just like
the sun that dissipates the darkness of ignorance. This is the special mercy
rendered to the pure devotee by Kṛṣṇa.

Due to the contamination of material association, through many, many millions of
births, one’s heart is always covered with the dust of materialism, but when one
engages in devotional service and constantly chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, the dust quickly
clears, and one is elevated to the platform of pure knowledge. The ultimate goal
of Viṣṇu can be attained only by this chant and by devotional service, and not
by mental speculation or argument. The pure devotee does not have to worry about
the necessities of life; he need not be anxious because when he removes the
darkness from his heart, everything is provided automatically by the Supreme
Lord, for He is pleased by the loving devotional service of the devotee. This is
the essence of the Gītā’s teachings. By studying Bhagavad-gītā, one can become a
completely surrendered soul to the Supreme Lord and engage himself in pure
devotional service. As the Lord takes charge, one becomes completely free from
all kinds of materialistic endeavors.
