### 10.12-13


arjuna uvāca

paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve

devarṣir nāradas tathā

asito devalo vyāsaḥ

svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; param—supreme; brahma—truth; param—supreme;
dhāma—sustenance; pavitram—purest; paramam—supreme; bhavān—Yourself;
puruṣam—personality; śāśvatam—original; divyam—transcendental;
ādi-devam—original Lord; ajam—unborn; vibhum—greatest; āhuḥ—say; tvām—unto You;
ṛṣayaḥ—sages; sarve—all; devarṣiḥ—the sage among the demigods; nāradaḥ—Nārada;
tathā—also; asitaḥ—Asita; devalaḥ—Devala; vyāsaḥ—Vyāsa; svayam—personally;
ca—also; eva—certainly; bravīṣi—explaining; me—unto me.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and
purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal
God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading
beauty. All the great sages such as Nārada, Asita, Devala, and Vyāsa proclaim
this of You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me.

PURPORT

In these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern philosopher,
for here it is clear that the Supreme is different from the individual soul.
Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses of Bhagavad-gītā in this
chapter, became completely free from all doubts and accepted Kṛṣṇa as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at once boldly declares, “You are
Parambrahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” And previously Kṛṣṇa states
that He is the originator of everything and everyone. Every demigod and every
human being is dependant on Him. Men and demigods, out of ignorance, think that
they are absolute and independant of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. That ignorance is
removed perfectly by the discharge of devotional service. This is already
explained in the previous verse by the Lord. Now by His grace, Arjuna is
accepting Him as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with the Vedic injunction. It
is not because Kṛṣṇa is an intimate friend of Arjuna that he is flattering Him
by calling Him the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever
Arjuna says in these two verses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions
affirm that only one who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can
understand Him, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse spoken
by Arjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.

In the Kena Upaniṣad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the rest for
everything, and Kṛṣṇa has already explained that everything is resting on Him.
The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad confirms that the Supreme Lord, in whom everything is
resting, can be realized only by those who engage constantly in thinking of Him.
This constant thinking of Kṛṣṇa is smaraṇam, one of the methods of devotional
service. It is only by devotional service to Kṛṣṇa that one can understand his
position and get rid of this material body.

In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure. One who
understands that Kṛṣṇa is the purest of the pure can become purified from all
sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected from sinful activities unless he
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna’s acceptance of Kṛṣṇa as the supreme
pure complies with the injunctions of Vedic literature. This is also confirmed
by great personalities, of whom Nārada is the chief.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should always meditate upon
Him and enjoy one’s transcendental relationship with Him. He is the supreme
existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth and death. Not only does Arjuna
confirm this, but all the Vedic literatures. the Purāṇas and histories. In all
Vedic literatures Kṛṣṇa is thus described, and the Supreme Lord Himself also
says in the Fourth Chapter, “Although I am unborn, I appear on this earth to
establish religious principles.” He is the supreme origin; He has no cause, for
He is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from Him. This
perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.

Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Kṛṣṇa. If we want to
understand Bhagavad-gītā, we should accept the statements in these two verses.
This is called the paramparā system, acceptance of the disciplic succession.
Unless one is in the disciplic succession, he cannot understand Bhagavad-gītā.
It is not possible by so-called academic education. Unfortunately those proud of
their academic education, despite so much evidence in Vedic literatures, stick
to their obstinate conviction that Kṛṣṇa is an ordinary person.

### 10.14


sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye

yan māṁ vadasi keśava

na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ

vidur devā na dānavāḥ

sarvam—all; etat—these; ṛtam—truths; manye—accept; yat—which; mām—unto me;
vadasi—You tell; keśava—O Kṛṣṇa; na—never; hi—certainly; te—Your; bhagavan—O
Personality of Godhead; vyaktim—revelation; viduḥ—can know; devaḥ—the demigods;
na—nor; dānavāḥ—the demons.

TRANSLATION

O Kṛṣṇa, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the gods
nor demons, O Lord, know Thy personality.

PURPORT

Arjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature cannot
understand Kṛṣṇa. He is not even known by the demigods, so what to speak of the
so-called scholars of this modern world? By the grace of the Supreme Lord,
Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth is Kṛṣṇa and that He is the perfect
one. One should therefore follow the path of Arjuna. He received the authority
of Bhagavad-gītā. As described in the Fourth Chapter, the paramparā system of
disciplic succession for the understanding of Bhagavad-gītā was lost, and
therefore Kṛṣṇa reestablished that disciplic succession with Arjuna because He
considered Arjuna His intimate friend and a great devotee. Therefore, as stated
in our Introduction to Gītopaniṣad, Bhagavad-gītā should be understood in the
paramparā system. When the paramparā system was lost, Arjuna was again selected
to rejuvenate it. The acceptance of Arjuna of all that Kṛṣṇa says should be
emulated; then we can understand the essence of Bhagavad-gītā, and then only can
we understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

### 10.15


svayam evātmanātmānaṁ

vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama

bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa

deva-deva jagat-pate

svayam—personality; eva—certainly; ātmanā—by Yourself; ātmānam—Yourself;
vettha—know; tvam—You; puruṣottama—O greatest of all persons; bhūta-bhāvana—O
origin of everything; bhūteśa—O Lord of everything; deva-deva—O Lord of all
demigods; jagat-pate—O Lord of the entire universe.

TRANSLATION

Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O origin of all, Lord of
all beings, God of gods, O Supreme Person, Lord of the universe!

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa can be known by persons who are in a relationship with
Him through the discharge of devotional service, like Arjuna and his successors.
Persons of demonic or atheistic mentality cannot know Kṛṣṇa. Mental speculation
that leads one away from the Supreme Lord is a serious sin, and one who does not
know Kṛṣṇa should not try to comment on Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is the
statement of Kṛṣṇa, and since it is the science of Kṛṣṇa, it should be
understood from Kṛṣṇa as Arjuna understood it. It should not be received from
atheistic persons.

The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman, localized
Paramātmā and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So at the last
stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. A liberated man and even a common man may realize impersonal Brahman
or localized Paramātmā, yet they may not understand God’s personality from the
verses of Bhagavad-gītā, which are being spoken by this person, Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes
the impersonalists accept Kṛṣṇa as Bhagavan, or they accept His authority. Yet
many liberated persons cannot understand Kṛṣṇa as Puruṣottama, the Supreme
Person, the father of all living entities. Therefore Arjuna addresses Him as
Puruṣottama. And if one comes to know Him as the father of all the living
entities, still one may not know Him as the supreme controller; therefore He is
addressed here as Bhūteśa, the supreme controller of everyone. And even if one
knows Kṛṣṇa as the supreme controller of all living entities, still one may not
know that He is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein
as Devadeva, the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knows Him as
the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He is the supreme
proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as Jagatpati. Thus the truth
about Kṛṣṇa is established in this verse by the realization of Arjuna, and we
should follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Kṛṣṇa as He is.

### 10.16


vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa

divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ

yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān

imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi

vaktum—to say; arhasi—deserve; aśeṣeṇa—in detail; divyā—divine; hi—certainly;
ātma—Yourself; vibhūtayaḥ—opulences; yābhiḥ—by which; vibhūtibhiḥ—opulences;
lokān—all the planets; imān—these; tvam—You; vyāpya—pervading; tiṣṭhasi—remain.

TRANSLATION

Please tell me in detail of Your divine powers by which You pervade all these
worlds and abide in them.

PURPORT

In this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his understanding
of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. By Kṛṣṇa’s grace, Arjuna has personal experience,
intelligence and knowledge and whatever else a person may have through all these
agencies, and he has understood Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For
him there is no doubt, Yet he is asking Kṛṣṇa to explain His all-pervading
nature so that in the future people will understand, especially the
impersonalists, how He exists in His all-pervading aspect through His different
energies. One should know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the
common people.

### 10.17


kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs

tvāṁ sadā paricintayan

keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu

cintyo ’si bhagavan mayā

katham—how; vidyām aham—shall I know; yogin—O supreme mystic; tvām—You;
sadā—always; paricintayan—thinking; keṣu—in which; keṣu—in which; ca—also;
bhāveṣu—nature; cintyaḥ asi—You are remembered; bhagavan—O Supreme; mayā—by me.

TRANSLATION

How should I meditate on You? In what various forms are You to be contemplated,
O Blessed Lord?

PURPORT

As it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
covered by His yoga-māyā. Only surrendered souls and devotees can see Him. Now
Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Kṛṣṇa, is the Supreme Godhead, but he wants
to know the general process by which the all-pervading Lord can be understood by
the common man. No common man, including the demons and atheists, can know Kṛṣṇa
because He is guarded by His yoga-māyā energy. Again, these questions are asked
by Arjuna for their benefit. The superior devotee is not only concerned for his
own understanding, but for the understanding of all mankind. Out of his mercy,
because he is a Vaiṣṇava, a devotee, Arjuna is opening the understanding for the
common man as far as the all-pervasiveness of the Supreme is concerned. He
addresses Kṛṣṇa specifically as yogin because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the master of the
yoga-māyā energy by which He is covered and uncovered to the common man. The
common man who has no love for Kṛṣṇa cannot always think of Kṛṣṇa; therefore he
has to think materially. Arjuna is considering the mode of thinking of the
materialistic persons of this world. Because materialists cannot understand
Kṛṣṇa spiritually, they are advised to concentrate the mind on physical things
and try to see how Kṛṣṇa is manifested by physical representations.

### 10.18


vistareṇātmano yogaṁ

vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana

bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi

śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam

vistareṇa—in description; ātmanaḥ—of Yourself; yogam—mystic power;
vibhūtim—opulences; ca—also; janārdana—O killer of the atheists; bhūyaḥ—again;
kathaya—describe; tṛptiḥ—satisfaction; hi—certainly; śṛṇvataḥ—hearing; na
asti—there is no; me—my; amṛtam—nectar.

TRANSLATION

Tell me again in detail, O Janārdana [Kṛṣṇa], of Your mighty potencies and
glories, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.

PURPORT

A similar statement was made to Sūta Gosvāmī by the ṛṣis of Naimiṣāraṇya, headed
by Śaunaka. That statement is:

vayaṁ tu na vitṛpyāma uttama-śloka-vikrame yac chṛṇvatāṁ rasa-jñānāṁ svādu svādu
pade pade.

“One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the transcendental
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by Vedic hymns. Those who have entered into
a transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa relish in every step descriptions of
the pastimes of the Lord.” Thus Arjuna is interested to hear about Kṛṣṇa,
specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.

Now as far as amṛtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statement
concerning Kṛṣṇa is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceived by
practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories are different from
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one will tire of hearing mundane
stories, but one never tires of hearing about Kṛṣṇa. It is for this reason only
that the history of the whole universe is replete with references to the
pastimes of the incarnations of Godhead. For instance, the Purāṇas are histories
of bygone ages that relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord.
In this way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated readings.
