### 10.27


uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ

viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam

airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ

narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam

uccaiḥśravasam—Uccaiḥśravā; aśvānām—among horses; viddhi—know; mām—Me;
amṛta-udbhavam—produced from the churning of the ocean; airāvatam—Airāvata;
gajendrāṇām—of elephants; narāṇām—among human beings; ca—and; narādhipam—the
king.

TRANSLATION

Of horses know Me to be Uccaiḥśravā, who rose out of the ocean, born of the
elixir of immortality; of lordly elephants I am Airāvata, and among men I am the
monarch.

PURPORT

The devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took a sea journey. On this
journey, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Śiva drank the poison. From
the nectar were produced many entities, of which there was a horse named
Uccaiḥśravā. Another animal produced from the nectar was an elephant named
Airāvata. Because these two animals were produced from nectar, they have special
significance, and they are representatives of Kṛṣṇa.

Amongst the human beings, the king is the representative of Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa
is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are appointed on account
of their godly qualifications, are maintainers of their kingdoms. Kings like
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahārāja Parīkṣit and Lord Rāma were all highly righteous
kings who always thought of the citizens’ welfare. In Vedic literature, the king
is considered to be the representative of God. In this age, however, with the
corruption of the principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now finally
abolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, people were more
happy under righteous kings.

### 10.28


āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ

dhenūnām asmi kāmadhuk

prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ

sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ

āyudhānām—of all weapons; aham—I am; vajram—the thunderbolt; dhenūnām—of cows;
asmi—I am; kāmadhuk—the surabhi cows; prajanaḥ—for begetting children; ca—and;
asmi—I am; kandarpaḥ—Cupid; sarpāṇām—of all snakes; asmi—I am; vāsukiḥ—Vāsuki.

TRANSLATION

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi, givers of abundant
milk. Of procreators I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of serpents I am
Vāsuki, the chief.

PURPORT

The thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Kṛṣṇa’s power. In Kṛṣṇaloka
in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at any time, and they
give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows do not exist in this
material world, but there is mention of them in Kṛṣṇaloka. The Lord keeps many
such cows, which are called surabhi. It is stated that the Lord is engaged in
herding the surabhi cows. Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons;
therefore Kandarpa is the representative of Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes sex is engaged in
only for sense gratification; such sex does not represent Kṛṣṇa. But sex for the
generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.29


anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ

varuṇo yādasām aham

pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi

yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham

anantaḥ—Ananta; ca—also; asmi—I am; nāgānām—of all serpents; varuṇaḥ—the demigod
controlling the water; yādasām—of all aquatics; aham—I am; piṭṝnām—of the
ancestors; aryamā—Aryāma; ca—also; asmi—I am; yamaḥ—the controller of death;
saṁyamatām—of all regulators; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of the celestial Nāga snakes I am Ananta; of the aquatic deities I am Varuṇa. Of
departed ancestors I am Aryamā, and among the dispensers of law I am Yama, lord
of death.

PURPORT

Among the many celestial Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is Varuṇa
among the aquatics. They both represent Kṛṣṇa. There is also a planet of trees
presided over by Aryamā, who represents Kṛṣṇa. There are many living entities
who give punishment to the miscreants, and among them Yama is the chief. Yama is
situated in a planet near this earthly planet, and after death those who are
very sinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds of punishments
for them.

### 10.30


prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ

kālaḥ kalayatām aham

mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ

vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām

prahlādaḥ—Prahlāda; ca—also; asmi—I am; daityānām—of the demons; kālaḥ—time;
kalayatām—of subduers; aham—I am; mṛgāṇām—of animals; ca—and; mṛgendraḥ—the
lion; aham—I am; vainateyaḥ—Garuḍa; ca—also; pakṣiṇām—of birds.

TRANSLATION

Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlāda; among subduers I am time;
among the beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuḍa, the feathered
carrier of Viṣṇu.

PURPORT

Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Ādityas, and the
sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Ādityas are devotees of the Lord, and
all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlāda was born in the family of the
Daityas, he was a great devotee from his childhood. Because of his devotional
service and godly nature, he is considered to be a representative of Kṛṣṇa.

There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in the
material universe and so represents Kṛṣṇa. Of the many animals, the lion is the
most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varieties of birds, Garuḍa, the
bearer of Lord Viṣṇu, is the greatest.

### 10.31


pavanaḥ pavatām asmi

rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham

jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś cāsmi

srotasām asmi jāhnavī

pavanaḥ—the wind; pavatām—of all that purifies; asmi—I am; rāmaḥ—Rāma;
śastra-bhṛtām—of the carriers of weapons; aham—I am; jhaṣāṇām—of all aquatics;
makaraḥ—shark; ca asmi—I am also; srotasām—of flowing rivers; asmi—I am;
jāhnavī—the River Ganges.

TRANSLATION

Of purifiers I am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rāma; of fishes I am
the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

PURPORT

Of all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly the most
dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Kṛṣṇa. And of rivers, the greatest
in India is the Mother Ganges. Lord Rāmacandra, of the Rāmāyaṇa, an incarnation
of Kṛṣṇa, is the mightest of warriors.

### 10.32


sargāṇām ādir antaś ca

madhyaṁ caivāham arjuna

adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ

vādaḥ pravadatām aham

sargāṇām—of all creations; ādiḥ—beginning; antaḥ—end; ca—and; madhyam—middle;
ca—also; eva—certainly; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna; adhyātma-vidyā—spiritual
knowledge; vidyānām—of all education; vādaḥ—natural conclusion; pravadatām—of
arguments; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O Arjuna.
Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the Self, and among logicians I am
the conclusive truth.

PURPORT

Among created manifestations, the total material elements are first created by
Mahā-Viṣṇu and are annihilated by Lord Śiva. Brahmā is the secondary creator.
All these created elements are different incarnations of the material qualities
of the Supreme Lord; therefore He is the beginning, the middle and the end of
all creation.

Regarding the spiritual science of the Self, there are many literatures, such as
the four Vedas, the Vedānta-sūtra and the Purāṇas, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the
Gītā. These are all representatives of Kṛṣṇa. Among logicians there are
different stages of argument. The presentation of evidence is called japa. The
attempt to defeat one another is called vitaṇḍa, and the final conclusion is
called vāda. The conclusive truth, the end of all reasoning processes, is Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.33


akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi

dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca

aham evākṣayaḥ kālo

dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ

akṣarāṇām—of letters; akāraḥ—the first; asmi—I am; dvandvaḥ—dual;
sāmāsikāsya—compounds; ca—and; aham—I am; eva—certainly; akṣayaḥ—eternal;
kālaḥ—time; dhātā—creator; aham—I am; viśvato-mukhaḥ—Brahmā.

TRANSLATION

Of letters I am the letter A, and among compounds I am the dual word. I am also
inexhaustable time, and of creators I am Brahmā, whose manifold faces turn
everywhere.

PURPORT

Akāra, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of the Vedic
literature. Without akāra, nothing can be sounded; therefore it is the beginning
of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compound words, of which the dual
word, like Rāma-kṛṣṇa, is called dvandvaḥ. For instance, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa have the
same rhythm and therefore are called dual.

Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time kills everything.
Time is the representative of Kṛṣṇa because in due course of time there will be
a great fire and everything will be annihilated.

Among the creators and living entities, Brahmā is the chief. The various Brahmās
exhibit four, eight, sixteen, etc., heads accordingly, and they are the chief
creators in their respective universes. The Brahmās are representatives of
Kṛṣṇa.

### 10.34


mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham

udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām

kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ

smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā

mṛtyuḥ—death; sarva-haraḥ—all-devouring; ca—also; aham—I am;
udbhavaḥ—generation; ca—also; bhaviṣyatām—of the future; kīrtiḥ—fame; śrīḥ
vāk—beautiful speech; ca—also; nārīṇāṁ—of women; smṛtiḥ—memory;
medhā—intelligence; dhṛtiḥ—faithfulness; kṣamā—patience.

TRANSLATION

I am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to be. Among
women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence, faithfulness and
patience.

PURPORT

As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is devouring every
living entity at every moment, but the last stroke is called death itself. That
death is Kṛṣṇa. All species of life undergo six basic changes. They are born,
they grow, they remain for some time, they reproduce, they dwindle and finally
vanish. Of these changes, the first is deliverance from the womb, and that is
Kṛṣṇa. The first generation is the beginning of all future activities.

The six opulences listed are considered to be feminine. If a woman possesses all
of them or some of them she becomes glorious. Sanskrit is a perfect language and
is therefore very glorious. After studying, if one can remember the subject
matter, he is gifted with good memory, or smṛti One need not read many books on
different subject matters; the ability to remember a few and quote them when
necessary is also another opulence.

### 10.35


bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ

gāyatrī chandasām aham

māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham

ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ

bṛhat-sāma—the Bṛhat-sāma; tathā—also; sāmnām—of the Sāma-veda song; gāyatrī—the
Gāyatrī hymns; chandasām—of all poetry; aham—I am; māsānām—of months;
mārga-śīrṣo ’ham—the month of November-December; aham—I am; ṛtūnām—of all
seasons; kusumākaraḥ—spring.

TRANSLATION

Of hymns I am the Bṛhat-sāma sung to the Lord Indra, and of poetry I am the
Gāyatrī verse, sung daily by brāhmaṇas. Of months I am November and December,
and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.

PURPORT

It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas, the
Sāma-veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the various demigods.

One of these songs is the Bṛhat-sāma, which has an exquisite melody and is sung
at midnight.

In Sanskrit, there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme and meter are
not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst the regulated poetry,
the Gāyatrī mantra, which is chanted by the duly qualified brāhmaṇas, is the
most prominent. The Gāyatrī mantra is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Because the Gāyatrī mantra is especially meant for God realization, it
represents the Supreme Lord. This mantra is meant for spiritually advanced
people, and when one attains success in chanting it, he can enter into the
transcendental position of the Lord. One must first acquire the qualities of the
perfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness according to the laws of
material nature, in order to chant the Gāyatrī mantra. The Gāyatrī mantra is
very important in Vedic civilization and is considered to be the sound
incarnation of Brahman. Brahmā is its initiator, and it is passed down from him
in disciplic succession.

The months of November and December are considered the best of all months
because in India grains are collected from the fields at this time, and the
people become very happy. Of course spring is a season universally liked because
it is neither too hot nor too cold, and the flowers and trees blossom and
flourish. In spring there are also many ceremonies commemorating Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes; therefore this is considered to be the most joyful of all seasons, and
it is the representative of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.
