### 11.2


bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ

śrutau vistaraśo mayā

tvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa

māhātmyam api cāvyayam

bhava—appearance; apyayau—disappearance; hi—certainly; bhūtānām—of all living
entities; śrutau—have heard; vistaraśaḥ—detail; mayā—by me; tvattaḥ—from You;
kamala-patrākṣa—O lotus-eyed one; māhātmyam—glories; api—also; ca—and;
avyayam—inexhaustible.

**TRANSLATION**

O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance and
disappearance of every living entity, as realized through Your inexhaustible
glories.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna addresses Lord Kṛṣṇa as “lotus-eyed” (Kṛṣṇa’s eyes appear just like the
petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Kṛṣṇa has assured him, in the last
verse of the previous chapter, that He sustains the entire universe with just a
fragment of Himself. He is the source of everything in this material
manifestation, and Arjuna has heard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna
further knows that in spite of His being the source of all appearances and
disappearances, He is aloof from them. His personality is not lost, although He
is all-pervading. That is the inconceivable opulence of Kṛṣṇa which Arjuna
admits that he has thoroughly understood.

### 11.3


evam etad yathāttha tvam

ātmānaṁ parameśvara

draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam

aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama

evam—that; etat—this; yathāttha—as it is; tvam—You; ātmānam—the soul;
parameśvara—the Supreme Lord; draṣṭum—to see; icchāmi—I wish; te—You;
rūpam—form; aiśvaram—divine; puruṣottama—O best of personalities.

**TRANSLATION**

O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here before me
Your actual position, I yet wish to see how You have entered into this cosmic
manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.

**PURPORT**

The Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His personal
representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made possible and is going on.
Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is inspired by the statements of Kṛṣṇa,
but in order to convince others in the future who may think that Kṛṣṇa is an
ordinary person, he desires to see Him actually in His universal form, to see
how He is acting from within the universe, although He is apart from it.
Arjuna’s asking the Lord’s permission is also significant. Since the Lord is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is present within Arjuna himself; therefore
He knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can understand that Arjuna has no special
desire to see Him in His universal form, for he is completely satisfied to see
Him in His personal form of Kṛṣṇa. But He can understand also that Arjuna wants
to see the universal form to convince others. He did not have any personal
desire for confirmation. Kṛṣṇa also understands that Arjuna wants to see the
universal form to set a criterion, for in the future there would be so many
imposters who would pose themselves as incarnations of God. The people,
therefore, should be careful; one who claims to be Kṛṣṇa should be prepared to
show his universal form to confirm his claim to the people.

### 11.4


manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ

mayā draṣṭum iti prabho

yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ

darśayātmānam avyayam

manyase—if You think; yadi—if; tat—that; śakyam—able to see; mayā—by me;
draṣṭum—to see; iti—thus; prabho—O Lord; yogeśvara—the Lord of all mystic power;
tataḥ—then; me—unto me; tvam—You; darśaya—show; ātmānam—Yourself;
avyayam—eternal.

**TRANSLATION**

If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O master of
all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal self.

**PURPORT**

It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the Supreme
Lord, Kṛṣṇa, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in loving
transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one can see the Lord
by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual spark; therefore it is
not possible to see or to understand the Supreme Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee,
does not depend on his speculative strength; rather, he admits his limitations
as a living entity and acknowledges Kṛṣṇa’s inestimable position. Arjuna could
understand that for a living entity it is not possible to understand the
unlimited infinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible to
understand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. The word
yogeśvara is also very significant here because the Lord has inconceivable
power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace, although He is
unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable grace of Kṛṣṇa. He does
not give Kṛṣṇa orders. Kṛṣṇa is not obliged to reveal Himself to anyone unless
one surrenders fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engages in devotional service.
Thus it is not possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental
speculations to see Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.5


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi

śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥ

nānā-vidhāni divyāni

nānā-varṇākṛtīni ca

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; paśya—just see;
me—Mine; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; rūpāṇi—forms; śataśaḥ—hundreds; atha—also;
sahasraśaḥ—thousands; nānā-vidhāni—variegated; divyāni—divine; nānā—variegated;
varṇa—colored; akṛtīni—forms; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Pṛthā, behold now My opulences,
hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms, multicolored like the sea.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna wanted to see Kṛṣṇa in His universal form, which, although a
transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestation and is
therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature. As the material
nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this universal form of Kṛṣṇa
is manifested and unmanifested. It is not eternally situated in the spiritual
sky like Kṛṣṇa’s other forms. As far as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager
to see the universal form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Kṛṣṇa in this way,
Kṛṣṇa reveals this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by any
ordinary man. Kṛṣṇa must give one the power to see it.

### 11.6


paśyādityān vasūn rudrān

aśvinau marutas tathā

bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi

paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata

paśya—see; ādityān—the twelve sons of Aditi; vasūn—the eight Vasus; rudrān—the
eleven forms of Rudra; aśvinau—the two Asvins; marutaḥ—the forty-nine Maruts
(demigods of the wind); tathā—also; bahūni—many; adṛṣṭa—that you have not heard
or seen; pūrvāṇi—before; paśya—there see; āścaryāṇi—all the wonderful; bhārata—O
best of the Bhāratas.

**TRANSLATION**

O best of the Bhāratas, see here the different manifestations of Ādityas,
Rudras, and all the demigods. Behold the many things which no one has ever seen
or heard before.

**PURPORT**

Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Kṛṣṇa and the most advanced of
learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everything about Kṛṣṇa.
Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known of all these forms
and manifestations. Now Kṛṣṇa reveals these wonderful forms.

### 11.7


ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ

paśyādya sa-carācaram

mama dehe guḍākeśa

yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi

iha—in this; ekastham—in one; jagat—the universe; kṛtsnam—completely; paśya—see;
adya—immediately; sa—with; cara—moving; acaram—not moving; mama—My; dehe—in this
body; guḍākeśa—O Arjuna; yat—that; ca—also; anyat—other; draṣṭum—to see;
icchasi—you like.

**TRANSLATION**

Whatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body. This universal
form can show you all that you now desire, as well as whatever you may desire in
the future. Everything is here completely.

**PURPORT**

No one can see the entire universe sitting in one place. Even the most advanced
scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of the universe. Kṛṣṇa
gives him the power to see anything he wants to see, past, present and future.
Thus by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is able to see everything.

### 11.8


na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum

anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā

divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ

paśya me yogam aiśvaram

na—never; tu—but; mām—Me; śakyase—able; draṣṭum—to see; anena—by this;
eva—certainly; sva-cakṣuṣā—with your own eyes; divyam—divine; dadāmi—I give;
te—you; cakṣuḥ—eyes; paśya—see; me—My; yogam aiśvaram—inconceivable mystic
power.

**TRANSLATION**

But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give to you divine
eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence.

**PURPORT**

A pure devotee does not like to see Kṛṣṇa in any form except His form with two
hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not with the mind but
with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is told not to
change his mind but his vision. The universal form of Kṛṣṇa is not very
important; that will be clear in the verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see
it, the Lord gives him the particular vision required to see that universal
form.

Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with Kṛṣṇa
are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences. The
playmates of Kṛṣṇa, the friends of Kṛṣṇa and the parents of Kṛṣṇa never want
Kṛṣṇa to show His opulences. They are so immersed in pure love that they do not
even know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving
exchange they forget that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it
is stated that the boys who play with Kṛṣṇa are all highly pious souls, and
after many, many births they are able to play with Kṛṣṇa. Such boys do not know
that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him as a personal
friend. The Supreme Person is considered as the impersonal Brahman by great
sages, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the devotees, and as a product
of this material nature by ordinary men. The fact is that the devotee is not
concerned to see the viśva-rūpa, the universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it
to substantiate Kṛṣṇa’s statement so that in the future people could understand
that Kṛṣṇa not only theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the
Supreme but actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirm
this because Arjuna is the beginning of the paramparā system. Those who are
actually interested to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and
who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna should understand that Kṛṣṇa not only
theoretically presented Himself as the Supreme, but actually revealed Himself as
the Supreme.

The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal form because He
knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as we have already
explained.

### 11.9


sañjaya uvāca

evam uktvā tato rājan

mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ

darśayām āsa pārthāya

paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sanjaya said; evam—thus; uktvā—saying; tataḥ—thereafter; rājan—O
King; mahā-yogeśvaraḥ—the most powerful mystic; hariḥ—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; darśayāmāsa—showed; pārthāya—unto Arjuna; paramam—divine;
rūpam—universal form; aiśvaram—opulences.

**TRANSLATION**

Sañjaya said: O King, speaking thus, the Supreme, the Lord of all mystic power,
the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna.
