### 6.45


prayatnād yatamānas tu

yogī saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ

aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas

tato yāti parāṁ gatim

prayatnāt—by rigid practice; yatamānaḥ—one who endeavors; tu—but; yogī—such a
transcendentalist; saṁśuddha—washed off; kilbiṣaḥ—all kinds of sins; aneka—many,
many; janma—births; saṁsiddhaḥ—so achieved perfection; tataḥ—thereafter;
yāti—attains; parām—highest; gatim—destination.

**TRANSLATION**

But when the yogī engages himself with sincere endeavor in making further
progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately, after many, many
births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.

**PURPORT**

A person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred family becomes
conscious of his favorable condition for executing yoga practice. With
determination, therefore, he begins his unfinished task, and thus he completely
cleanses himself of all material contaminations. When he is finally free from
all contaminations, he attains the supreme perfection—Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is the perfect stage of being freed of all contaminations. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

yeṣāṁ tvanta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā
bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

“After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is completely
freed from all contaminations, and from all illusory dualities, one then becomes
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.”

### 6.46


tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogī

jñānibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaḥ

karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī

tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

tapasvibhyaḥ—than the ascetic; adhikaḥ—greater; yogī—the yogī; jñānibhyaḥ—than
the wise; api—also; mataḥ—considered; adhikaḥ—greater than; karmibhyaḥ—than the
fruitive worker; ca—also; adhikaḥ—greater than; yogī—the yogī; tasmāt—therefore;
yogī—a transcendentalist; bhava—just become; arjuna—O Arjuna.

**TRANSLATION**

A yogī is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater than
the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogī.

**PURPORT**

When we speak of yoga we refer to linking up our consciousness with the Supreme
Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by various practitioners in
terms of the particular method adopted. When the linking up process is
predominantly in fruitive activities, it is called karma-yoga, when it is
predominantly empirical, it is called jñāna-yoga, and when it is predominantly
in a devotional relationship with the Supreme Lord, it is called bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga or Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as
will be explained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein the
superiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better than
bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and as such, nothing can
excel it. Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect. Empiric knowledge
without surrender to the Supreme Lord is also imperfect. And fruitive work
without Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a waste of time. Therefore, the most highly
praised form of yoga performance mentioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is
still more clearly explained in the next verse.

### 6.47


yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

yoginām—of all yogīs; api—also; sarveṣām—all types of; mat-gatena—abiding in Me;
antaḥ-ātmanā—always thinking of Me within; śraddhāvān—in full faith;
bhajate—renders transcendental loving service; yaḥ—one who; mām—Me (the Supreme
Lord); saḥ—he; me—Mine; yuktatamaḥ—the greatest yogī; mataḥ—is considered.

**TRANSLATION**

And of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is
the highest of all.

**PURPORT**

The word bhajete is significant here. Bhajete has its root in the verb bhaj,
which is used when there is need of service. The English word “worship” cannot
be used in the same sense as bhaja. Worship means to adore, or to show respect
and honor to the worthy one. But service with love and faith is especially meant
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can avoid worshiping a respectable
man or a demigod and may be called discourteous, but one cannot avoid serving
the Supreme Lord without being thoroughly condemned. Every living entity is part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus every living entity
is intended to serve the Supreme Lord by his own constitution. Failing to do
this, he falls down. The Bhāgavatam confirms this as follows:

ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād ātma-prabhavam īśvaram na bhajanty avajānanti sthānād
bhraṣṭā patanty adhaḥ.

“Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the Primeval
Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainly fall down from
his constitutional position.”

In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti is applicable
to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word “worship” can be applied to demigods
or to any other common living entity. The word avajānanti, used in this verse of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, is also found in the Bhagavad-gītā: avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ:
“Only the fools and rascals deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord
Kṛṣṇa.” Such fools take it upon themselves to write commentaries on the
Bhagavad-gītā without an attitude of service to the Lord. Consequently they
cannot properly distinguish between the word bhajanti and the word “worship.”

The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti-yoga. All other
yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-yoga. Yoga actually
means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressions toward the destination of
bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yoga to the end of bhakti-yoga is a
long way to self-realization. Karma-yoga, without fruitive results, is the
beginning of this path. When karma-yoga increases in knowledge and renunciation,
the stage is called jñāna-yoga. When jñāna-yoga increases in meditation on the
Supersoul by different physical processes, and the mind is on Him, it is called
aṣṭāṅga-yoga. And, when one surpasses the aṣṭāṅga-yoga and comes to the point of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa, it is called bhakti-yoga, the
culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal, but to analyze
bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these other yogas. The yogī who is
progressive is therefore on the true path of eternal good fortune. One who
sticks to a particular point and does not make further progress is called by
that particular name: karma-yogī, jñāna-yogī or dhyāna-yogī, rāja-yogī,
haṭha-yogī, etc. If one is fortunate enough to come to the point of bhakti-yoga,
it is to be understood that he has surpassed all the other yogas. Therefore, to
become Kṛṣṇa conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as, when we speak of
Himalayan, we refer to the world’s highest mountains, of which the highest peak,
Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.

It is by great fortune that one comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness on the path of
bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedic direction. The ideal
yogī concentrates his attention on Kṛṣṇa, who is called Śyāmasundara, who is as
beautifully colored as a cloud, whose lotus-like face is as effulgent as the
sun, whose dress is brilliant with jewels and whose body is flower garlanded.
Illuminating all sides is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti.
He incarnates in different forms such as Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha and Kṛṣṇa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the son
of Mother Yaśodā, and He is known as Kṛṣṇa, Govinda and Vāsudeva. He is the
perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with all opulences and
transcendental qualities. If one remains fully conscious of these features of
the Lord, he is called the highest yogī.

This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only by bhakti-yoga, as
is confirmed in all Vedic literature:

yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau.  tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ
prakāśante mahātmanaḥ.

“Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed.”

Bhaktir asya bhajanaṁ tadihāmutropādhi nairāsyenāmuṣmin manaḥ kalpanam; etad eva
naiṣkarmyam. “Bhakti means devotional service to the Lord which is free from
desire for material profit, either in this life or in the next. Devoid of such
inclinations, one should fully absorb the mind in the Supreme. That is the
purpose of naiṣkarmya.”

These are some of the means for performance of bhakti or Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.


Knowledge of the Absolute

### 7.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha

yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ

asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ

yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Lord said; mayi—unto Me; āsakta-manāḥ—mind
attached; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yogam—self-realization; yuñjan—so practicing;
mat-āśrayaḥ—in consciousness of Me (Kṛṣṇa consciousness); asaṁśayam—without
doubt; samagram—completely; mām—unto Me; yathā—as much as; jñāsyasi—you can
know; tat—that; śṛṇu—try to hear.

**TRANSLATION**

Now hear, O son of Pṛthā [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full consciousness
of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free from doubt.

**PURPORT**

In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, the nature of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
fully described. Kṛṣṇa is full in all opulences, and how He manifests such
opulences is described herein. Also, four kinds of fortunate people who become
attached to Kṛṣṇa, and four kinds of unfortunate people who never take to Kṛṣṇa
are described in this chapter.

In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gītā, the living entity has been described
as nonmaterial spirit soul which is capable of elevating himself to
self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end of the Sixth Chapter,
it has been clearly stated that the steady concentration of the mind upon Kṛṣṇa,
or in other words Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By
concentrating one’s mind upon Kṛṣṇa, one is able to know the Absolute Truth
completely, but not otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramātmā
realization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth because it is
partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Kṛṣṇa, and everything is revealed to
the person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness one knows
that Kṛṣṇa is ultimate knowledge beyond any doubts. Different types of yoga are
only steppingstones on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One who takes directly
to Kṛṣṇa consciousness automatically knows about brahmajyoti and Paramātmā in
full. By practice of Kṛṣṇa consciousness yoga, one can know everything in
full—namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature, and
their manifestations with paraphernalia.

One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Kṛṣṇa the Supreme is made possible
by prescribed devotional service in nine different forms, of which śravaṇam is
the first and most important. The Lord therefore says to Arjuna, “tat śṛṇu,” or
“Hear from Me.” No one can be a greater authority than Kṛṣṇa, and therefore by
hearing from Him one receives the greatest opportunity for progress in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. One has therefore to learn from Kṛṣṇa directly or from a pure
devotee of Kṛṣṇa—and not from a nondevotee upstart, puffed up with academic
education.

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam this process of understanding Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in the Second Chapter
of the First Canto as follows:

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāṁ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ hṛdyantaḥstho hy abhadrāṇi
vidbunoti suhṛt satām.

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir
bhavati naiṣṭhikī.

tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhadayaś ca ye ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ
sattve prasīdati.

evam prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ
mukta-saṅgasya jāyate.

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi dṛṣṭa
evātmanīśvare.

“To hear about Kṛṣṇa from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him directly
through the Bhagavad-gītā, is itself righteous activity. And for one who hears
about Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is dwelling in everyone’s heart, acts as a
best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee who constantly engages in hearing
of Him. In this way, a devotee naturally develops his dormant transcendental
knowledge. As he hears more about Kṛṣṇa from the Bhāgavatam and from the
devotees, he becomes fixed in the devotional service of the Lord. By development
of devotional service one becomes freed from the modes of passion and ignorance,
and thus material lusts and avarice are diminished. When these impurities are
wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of pure goodness,
becomes enlivened by devotional service and understands the science of God
perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs the hard knot of material affection and
enables one to come at once to the stage of ‘asaṁśayaṁ samagram,’ understanding
of the Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead.” (Bhāg. 1.2.17–21)

Therefore only by hearing from Kṛṣṇa or from His devotee in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
can one understand the science of Kṛṣṇa.

### 7.2


jñānaṁ te ’haṁ sa-vijñānam

idaṁ vakṣyāmy aśeṣataḥ

yaj jñātvā neha bhūyo ’nyaj

jñātavyam avaśiṣyate

jñānam—phenomenal knowledge; te—unto you; aham—I; sa—with; vijñānam—noumenal
knowledge; idam—this; vakṣyāmi—shall explain; aśeṣataḥ—in full; yat—which;
jñātvā—knowing; na—not; iha—in this world; bhūyaḥ—further; anyat—anything more;
jñātavyam—knowable; avaśiṣyate—remains to be known.

**TRANSLATION**

I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge both phenomenal and
noumenal, by knowing which there shall remain nothing further to be known.

**PURPORT**

Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world and the spirit
behind it. The source of both of them is transcendental knowledge. The Lord
wants to explain the above-mentioned system of knowledge because Arjuna is
Kṛṣṇa’s confidential devotee and friend. In the beginning of the Fourth Chapter
this explanation was given by the Lord, and it is again confirmed here: complete
knowledge can be achieved only by the devotee of the Lord directly from the Lord
in disciplic succession. Therefore one should be intelligent enough to know the
source of all knowledge, who is the cause of all causes and the only object for
meditation in all types of yoga practices. When the cause of all causes becomes
known, then everything knowable becomes known, and nothing remains unknown. The
Vedas say, “yasmin vijñāte sarvam eva vijñatam bhavanti.”
