### 8.16


ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

punar āvartino ’rjuna

mām upetya tu kaunteya

punar janma na vidyate

ābrahma—up to the Brahmaloka planet; bhuvanāt—from the planetary systems;
lokāḥ—planets; punaḥ—again; āvartinaḥ—returning; arjuna—O Arjuna; mām—unto Me;
upetya—arriving; tu—but; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; punaḥ janma—rebirth; na—never;
vidyate—takes to.

**TRANSLATION**

From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places
of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who attains to My
abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again.

**PURPORT**

All kinds of yogīs—karma, jñāna, haṭha, etc.—eventually have to attain
devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, before they can go
to Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental abode and never return. Those who attain the highest
material planets or the planets of the demigods are again subjected to repeated
birth and death. As persons on earth are elevated to higher planets, people in
higher planets such as Brahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to earth.
The practice of sacrifice called pañcāgni-vidyā, recommended in the Kaṭha
Upaniṣad, enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, in Brahmaloka, one does not
cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he must return to earth. Those who progress
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the higher planets are gradually elevated to higher
and higher planets and at the time of universal devastation are transferred to
the eternal spiritual kingdom. When there is devastation of this material
universe, Brahmā and his devotees, who are constantly engaged in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, are all transferred to the spiritual universe and to specific
spiritual planets according to their desires.

### 8.17


sahasra-yuga-paryantam

ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ

rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ

te ’ho-rātra-vido janāḥ

sahasra—thousand; yuga—millenniums; prayantam—including; ahaḥ—day; yat—that;
brahmaṇaḥ—of Brahmā; viduḥ—know it; rātrim—night; yuga—millenniums;
sahasra-antām—similarly, at the end of one thousand; te—that; ahaḥ-rātra—day and
night; vidaḥ—understand; janāḥ—people.

**TRANSLATION**

By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of Brahmā’s
one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

**PURPORT**

The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in cycles of
kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahmā, and one day of Brahmā consists of a thousand
cycles of four yugas or ages: Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali. The cycle of
Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdom and religion, there being practically
no ignorance and vice, and the yuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Tretā-yuga
vice is introduced, and this yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the Dvāpara-yuga
there is an even greater decline in virtue and religion, vice increasing, and
this yuga lasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the yuga we have now
been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an abundance of strife,
ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue being practically nonexistent, and
this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-yuga vice increases to such a point that
at the termination of the yuga the Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki
avatara, vanquishes the demons, saves His devotees, and commences another
Satya-yuga. Then the process is set rolling again. These four yugas, rotating a
thousand times, comprise one day of Brahmā, the creator god, and the same number
comprise one night. Brahmā lives one hundred of such “years” and then dies.
These “hundred years” by earth calculations total to 311 trillion and 40 million
earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahmā seems fantastic and
interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity it is as brief as a lightning
flash. In the causal ocean there are innumerable Brahmās rising and disappearing
like bubbles in the Atlantic. Brahmā and his creation are all part of the
material universe, and therefore they are in constant flux.

In the material universe not even Brahmā is free from the process of birth, old
age, disease and death. Brahmā, however, is directly engaged in the service of
the Supreme Lord in the management of this universe—therefore he at once attains
liberation. Elevated sannyāsīs are promoted to Brahmā’s particular planet,
Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in the material universe and which
survives all the heavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system,
but in due course Brahmā and all inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject to death,
according to the law of material nature.

### 8.18


avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ

prabhavanty ahar-āgame

rātry-āgame pralīyante

tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake

avyaktāt—from the unmanifest; vyaktayaḥ—living entities; sarvāḥ—all;
prabhavanti—come into being; ahaḥ-āgame—at the beginning of the day;
rātri-āgame—at the fall of night; pralīyante—are annihilated; tatra—there;
eva—certainly; avyakta—the unmanifest; saṁjñake—called.

**TRANSLATION**

When Brahmā’s day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes into
being, and at the arrival of Brahmā’s night they are all annihilated.

**PURPORT**

The less intelligent jīvas try to remain within this material world and are
accordingly elevated and degraded in the various planetary systems. During the
daytime of Brahmā they exhibit their activities, and at the coming of Brahmā’s
night they are annihilated. In the day they receive various bodies for material
activities, and at night these bodies perish. The jīvas (individual souls)
remain compact in the body of Viṣṇu and again and again are manifest at the
arrival of Brahmā’s day. When Brahmā’s life is finally finished, they are all
annihilated and remain unmanifest for millions and millions of years. Finally,
when Brahmā is born again in another millennium, they are again manifest. In
this way the jīvas are captivated by the material world. However, those
intelligent beings who take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Rāma in devotional service transfer themselves, even in this life, to the
spiritual planet of Kṛṣṇa and become eternally blissful there, not being subject
to such rebirths.

### 8.19


bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ

bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate

rātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha

prabhavaty ahar-āgame

bhūta-grāmaḥ—the aggregate of all living entities; saḥ—they; eva—certainly;
ayam—this; bhūtvā bhūtvā—taking birth; pralīyate—annihilate; rātri—night;
āgame—on arrival; avaśaḥ—automatically; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
prabhavanti—manifest; ahaḥ—during daytime; āgame—on arrival.

**TRANSLATION**

Again and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active; and again the
night falls, O Pārtha, and they are helplessly dissolved.

### 8.20


paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo

’vyakto ’vyaktāt sanātanaḥ

yaḥ sa sarveṣu bhūteṣu

naśyatsu na vinaśyati

paraḥ—transcendental; tasmāt—from that; tu—but; bhāvaḥ—nature; anyaḥ—another;
avyaktaḥ—unmanifest; avyaktāt—from the unmanifest; sanātanaḥ—eternal; yaḥ—that;
saḥ—which; sarveṣu—all; bhūteṣu—manifestation; naśyatsu—being annihilated;
na—never; vinaśyati—annihilated.

**TRANSLATION**

Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this
manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When
all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.

**PURPORT**

Kṛṣṇa’s superior spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is beyond
all the changes of material nature, which is manifest and annihilated during the
days and nights of Brahmā. Kṛṣṇa’s superior energy is completely opposite in
quality to material nature. Superior and inferior nature are explained in the
Seventh Chapter.

### 8.21


avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas

tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim

yaṁ prāpya na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

avyaktaḥ—unmanifested; akṣaraḥ—infallible; iti—thus; uktaḥ—said; tam—that which;
āhuḥ—is known; paramām—ultimate; gatim—destination; yam—that which;
prāpya—gaining; na—never; nivartante—comes back; tat-dhāma—that abode;
paramam—supreme; mama—Mine.

**TRANSLATION**

That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the supreme
destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That is My supreme abode.

**PURPORT**

The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is described in the
Brahma-saṁhitā as cintāmaṇi-dhāma, a place where all desires are fulfilled. The
supreme abode of Lord Kṛṣṇa known as Goloka Vṛndāvana is full of palaces made of
touchstone. There are also trees which are called “desire trees” that supply any
type of eatable upon demand, and there are cows known as surabhi cows which
supply a limitless supply of milk. In this abode, the Lord is served by hundreds
of thousands of goddesses of fortune (Lakṣmīs), and He is called Govinda, the
primal Lord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed to blow His
flute (venum kvanantam). His transcendental form is the most attractive in all
the worlds—His eyes are like the lotus petals and the color of His body like
clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excels that of thousands of cupids.
He wears saffron cloth, a garland around His neck and a peacock feather in His
hair. In the Gītā Lord Krṣṇa gives only a small hint of His personal abode
(Goloka Vṛndāvana) which is the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. A
vivid description is given in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Vedic literature states that
there is nothing superior to the abode of the Supreme Godhead, and that that
abode is the ultimate destination. When one attains to it, he never returns to
the material world. Kṛṣṇa’s supreme abode and Kṛṣṇa Himself are nondifferent,
being of the same quality. On this earth, Vṛndāvana, ninety miles southeast of
Delhi, is a replica of that supreme Goloka Vṛndāvana located in the spiritual
sky. When Kṛṣṇa descended on this earth, He sported on that particular tract of
land known as Vṛndāvana in the district of Mathurā, India.

### 8.22


puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha

bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā

yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

puruṣaḥ—the Supreme Personality; saḥ—He; paraḥ—the Supreme, than whom no one is
greater; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; bhaktyā—by devotional service; labhyaḥ—can be
achieved; tu—but; ananyayā—unalloyed, undeviating devotion; yasya—His;
antaḥsthāni—within; bhūtāni—all this material manifestation; yena—by whom;
sarvam—all; idam—whatever we can see; tatam—distributed.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable by
unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode, He is all-pervading,
and everything is situated within Him.

**PURPORT**

It is here clearly stated that the supreme destination from which there is no
return is the abode of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-saṁhitā describes
this supreme abode as ānanda-cinmaya-rasa, a place where everything is full of
spiritual bliss. Whatever variegatedness is manifest there is all of the quality
of spiritual bliss—there is nothing material. All variegatedness is expanded as
the spiritual expansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the manifestation
there is totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter Seven. As far
as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always in His supreme
abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His material energy. So by His
spiritual and material energies He is present everywhere—both in the material
and in the spiritual universes. Yasyāntaḥsthāni means that everything is
sustained by Him, whether it be spiritual or material energy.

It is clearly stated here that only by bhakti, or devotional service, can one
enter into the Vaikuṇṭha (spiritual) planetary system. In all the Vaikuṇṭhas
there is only one Supreme Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who has expanded Himself into millions
and millions of plenary expansions. These plenary expansions are four-armed, and
they preside over the innumerable spiritual planets. They are known by a variety
of names—Puruṣottama, Trivikrama, Keśava, Mādhava, Aniruddha, Hṛṣīkeśa,
Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna, Śrīdhara, Vāsudeva, Dāmodara, Janārdana, Nārāyaṇa,
Vāmana, Padmanābha, etc. These plenary expansions are likened unto the leaves of
a tree, and the main tree is likened to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, dwelling in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, His supreme abode, systematically conducts all affairs of both
universes (material and spiritual) without a flaw by power of His
all-pervasiveness.
