### 11.33


tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva

jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddham

mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva

nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin

tasmāt—therefore; tvām—you; uttiṣṭha—get up; yaśaḥ—fame; labhasva—gain;
jitvā—conquering; śatrūn—enemies; bhuṅkṣva—enjoy; rājyam—kingdom;
samṛddham—flourishing; mayā—by Me; eva—certainly; ete—all these; nihatāḥ—already
killed; pūrvam eva—by previous elements; nimitta-mātram—just become the cause;
bhava—become; savyasācin—O Savyasācin.

TRANSLATION

Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies you will
enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement,
and you, O Savyasācin, can be but an instmment in the fight.

PURPORT

Savyasācin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the field; thus
Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of delivering arrows to kill
his enemies. “Just become an instrument”: nimitta-mātram. This word is also very
significant. The whole world is moving according to the plan of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge
think that nature is moving without a plan and all manifestations are but
accidental formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest that
perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no question of
“perhaps” and “maybe.” There is a specific plan being carried out in this
material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is a chance for the
conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home. As long they have the
domineering mentality which makes them try to lord it over material nature, they
are conditioned. But anyone who can understand the plan of the Supreme Lord and
cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction
of the cosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus the
Battle of Kurukṣetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjuna was
refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight and at the same time
desire the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is in full Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and if his life is devoted to His transcendental service, he is
perfect.

### 11.34


droṇaṁ ca bhīṣmaṁ ca jayadrathaṁ ca

karṇaṁ tathānyān api yodha-vīrān

mayā hatāṁs tvaṁ jahi mā vyathiṣṭhā

yudhyasva jetāsi raṇe sapatnān

droṇam ca—also Droṇa; bhīṣmam ca—also Bhīṣma; jayadratham ca—also Jayadratha;
karṇam—also Karṇa; tathā—also; anyān—others; api—certainly; yodha-vīrān—great
warriors; mayā—by Me; hatān—already killed; tvam—you; jahi—become victorious;
mā—never; vyathiṣṭhāḥ—be disturbed; yudhyasva—just fight; jetāsi—just conquer;
raṇe—in the fight; sapatnān—enemies.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: All the great warriors—Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Jayadratha,
Karṇa—are already destroyed. Simply fight, and you will vanquish your enemies.

PURPORT

Every plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so kind and
merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit to His devotees who
carry out His plan according to His desire. Life should therefore move in such a
way that everyone acts in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and understands the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through the medium of a spiritual master. The plans of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the plans of
the devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans and be
victorious in the struggle for existence.

### 11.35


sañjaya uvāca

etac chrutvā vacanaṁ keśavasya

kṛtāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirītī

namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ

sa-gadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya

sañjayaḥ uvāca—Sañjaya said; etat—thus; śrutvā—hearing; vacanam—speech;
keśavasya—of Kṛṣṇa; kṛtāñjaliḥ—with folded hands; vepamānaḥ—trembling;
kirītī—Arjuna; namaskṛtvā—offering obeisances; bhūyaḥ—again; eva—also; āha
kṛṣṇam—said unto Kṛṣṇa; sa-gadgadam—faltering; bhīta-bhītaḥ—fearful;
praṇamya—offering obeisances.

TRANSLATION

Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: O King, after hearing these words from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Arjuna trembled, fearfully offered obeisances with
folded hands and began, falteringly, to speak as follows:

PURPORT

As we have already explained, because of the situation created by the universal
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna became bewildered in wonder;
thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances to Kṛṣṇa again and again, and
with faltering voice he began to pray, not as a friend, but as a devotee in
wonder.

### 11.36


arjuna uvāca

sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā

jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca

rakṣāṁsi bhītāni diśo dravanti

sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saṅghāḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; sthāne—rightly; hṛṣīkeśa—O master of all senses;
tava—Your; prakīrtya—glories; jagat—the entire world; prahṛṣyati—rejoicing;
anurajyate—becoming attached; rakṣāṁsi—the demons; bhītāni—out of fear;
diśaḥ—directions; dravanti—fleeing; sarve—all; namasyanti—offering respect;
ca—also; siddha-saṅghāḥ—the perfect human beings.

TRANSLATION

O Hṛṣīkeśa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name and thus everyone
becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their
respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this
is rightly done.

PURPORT

Arjuna, after hearing from Kṛṣṇa about the outcome of the Battle of Kurukṣetra,
became an enlightened devotee of the Supreme Lord. He admitted that everything
done by Kṛṣṇa is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed that Kṛṣṇa is the maintainer and
the object of worship for the devotees and the destroyer of the undesirables.
His actions are equally good for all. Arjuna understood herein that when the
Battle of Kurukṣetra was being concluded, in outer space there were present many
demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentia of the higher planets, and they were
observing the fight because Kṛṣṇa was present there. When Arjuna saw the
universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but others, who
were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised. Out of
their natural fear of the devastating form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they fled. Kṛṣṇa’s treatment of the devotees and the atheists is
praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee glorifies the Lord because he knows
that whatever He does is good for all.

### 11.37


kasmāc ca te na nameran mahātman

garīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre

ananta deveśa jagan-nivāsa

tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat

kasmāt—why; ca—also; te—unto You; na—not; nameran—offer proper obeisances;
mahātman—O great one; garīyase—You are better than; brahmaṇaḥ—Brahmā;
api—although; ādi-kartre—the supreme creator; ananta—unlimited; deveśa—God of
the gods; jagat-nivāsa—O refuge of the universe; tvam—You are;
akṣaram—imperishable; sat-asat—cause and effect; tat-param—transcendental;
yat—because.

TRANSLATION

O great one, who stands above even Brahmā, You are the original master. Why
should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? O refuge of the
universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of all causes, transcendental
to this material manifestation.

PURPORT

By this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Kṛṣṇa is worshipable by
everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul of every soul. Arjuna is
addressing Kṛṣṇa as mahātmā, which means that He is most magnanimous and
unlimited. Ananta indicates that there is nothing which is not covered by the
influence and energy of the Supreme Lord, and deveśa means that He is the
controller of all demigods and is above them all. He is the center of the whole
universe. Arjuna also thought that it was fitting that all the perfect living
entities and all powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Him
because no one is greater than Him. He especially mentions that Kṛṣṇa is greater
than Brahmā because Brahmā is created by Him. Brahmā is born out of the lotus
stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who is Kṛṣṇa’s
plenary expansion; therefore Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who is born of Brahmā, and
all other demigods must offer their respectful obeisances. Thus the Lord is
respected by Lord Śiva and Brahmā and similar other demigods. The word akṣaram
is very significant because this material creation is subject to destruction,
but the Lord is above this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and
being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this material
nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself. He is therefore the
all-great Supreme.

### 11.38


tvam ādi-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇas

tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam

vettāsi vedyaṁ ca paraṁ ca dhāma

tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa

tvam—You; ādi-devaḥ—the original Supreme God; puruṣaḥ—personality; purāṇaḥ—old;
tvam—You; asya—this; viśvasya—universe; param—transcendental; nidhānam—refuge;
vettā—knower; asi—You are; vedyam ca—and the knowable; param ca—and
transcendental; dhāma—refuge; tvayā—by You; tatam—pervaded; viśvam—universe;
ananta-rūpa—unlimited form.

TRANSLATION

You are the original Personality, the Godhead. You are the only sanctuary of
this manifested cosmic world. You know everything, and You are all that is
knowable. You are above the material modes. O limitless form! This whole cosmic
manifestation is pervaded by You!

PURPORT

Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore He is the
ultimate rest. Nidhānam means that everything, even the Brahman effulgence,
rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa. He is the knower of
everything that is happening in this world, and if knowledge has any end, He is
the end of all knowledge; therefore He is the known and the knowable. He is the
object of knowledge because He is all-pervading. Because He is the cause in the
spiritual world, He is transcendental. He is also the chief personality in the
transcendental world.

### 11.39


vāyur yamo ’gnir varuṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ

prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś ca

namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ

punaś ca bhūyo ’pi namo namas te

vāyuḥ—air; yamaḥ—controller; agniḥ—fire; varuṇaḥ—water; śaśāṅkaḥ—moon;
prajāpatiḥ—Brahmā; tvam—You; prapitāmahaḥ—grandfather; ca—also; namaḥ—offering
respects; namaḥ te—again I offer my respects unto You; astu—are being;
sahasra-kṛtvaḥ—a thousand times; punaḥ ca—and again; bhūyaḥ—again; api—also;
namaḥ—offer my respects; namaḥ te—offering my respects unto You.

TRANSLATION

You are air, fire, water, and You are the moon! You are the supreme controller
and the grandfather. Thus I offer my respectful obeisances unto You a thousand
times, and again and yet again!

PURPORT

The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna also addresses
Kṛṣṇa as the grandfather because He is the father of Brahmā, the first living
creature in the universe.
