### 11.40


namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te

namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva

ananta-vīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁ

sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ’si sarvaḥ

namaḥ—offering obeisances; purastāt—from the front; atha—also; pṛṣṭhataḥ—from
behind; te—You; namaḥ astu—offer my respects; te—unto You; sarvataḥ—from all
sides; eva sarva—because You are everything; ananta-vīrya—unlimited potency;
amita-vikramaḥ—unlimited force; tvam—You; sarvam—everything; samāpnoṣi—cover;
tataḥ asi—therefore You are; sarvaḥ—everything.

TRANSLATION

Obeisances from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded power,
You are the master of limitless, might! You are all-pervading, and thus You are
everything!

PURPORT

Out of loving ecstasy for Kṛṣṇa, his friend, Arjuna is offering his respects
from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of all potencies and all
prowess and far superior to all the great warriors assembled on the battlefield.
It is said in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa: yo ’yaṁ tavāgato deva-samīpaṁ devatā-gaṇaḥ sa
tvam eva jagat-sraṣṭā yataḥ sarva-gato bhavān. “Whoever comes before You, be he
a demigod, is created by You, O Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

### 11.41-42


sakheti matvā prasabhaṁ yad uktaṁ

he kṛṣṇa he yādava he sakheti

ajānatā mahimānaṁ tavedaṁ

mayā pramādāt praṇayena vāpi

yac cāvahāsārtham asat-kṛto ’si

vihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu

eko ’tha vāpy acyuta tat-samakṣaṁ

tat kṣāmaye tvām aham aprameyam

sakhā—friend; iti—thus; matvā—thinking; prasabham—temporary; yat—whatever;
uktam—said; he krṣṇa—O Kṛṣṇa; he yādava—O Yādava; he sakhā iti—O my dear friend,
ajānatā—without knowing; mahimānam—glories; tava—Your; idam—this; mayā—by me;
pramādāt—out of foolishness; pranayena—out of love; vā api—either; yat—whatever;
ca—also; avahāsārtham—for joking; asatkṛtaḥ—dishonor; asi—have been done;
vihāra—in relaxation; śayyā—in joking; āsana—in a resting place; bhojaneṣu—or
while eating together; ekaḥ—alone; athavā—or; api—others; acyuta—O infallible
one; tat-samakṣam—as Your competitor; tat—all those; kṣāmaye—excuse; tvām—You;
aham—I; aprameyam—immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

I have in the past addressed You as “O Kṛṣṇa,” “O Yādava,” “O my friend,”
without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may have done in madness
or in love. I have dishonored You many times while relaxing or while lying on
the same bed or eating together, sometimes alone and sometimes in front of many
friends. Please excuse me for all my offenses.

PURPORT

Although Kṛṣṇa is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form, Arjuna
remembers his friendly relationship with Kṛṣṇa and is therefore asking pardon
and requesting Him to excuse him for the many informal gestures which arise out
of friendship. He is admitting that formerly he did not know that Kṛṣṇa could
assume such a universal form, although He explained it as his intimate friend.
Arjuna did not know how many times he may have dishonored Him by addressing Him
as “O my friend, O Kṛṣṇa, O Yādava,” etc., without acknowledging His opulence.
But Kṛṣṇa is so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played with
Arjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocation between the
devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the living entity and Kṛṣṇa is
fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we can see from the behavior of
Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulence in the universal form, he could
not forget his friendly relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

### 11.43


pitāsi lokasya carācarasya

tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān

na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo

loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva

pitā—father; asi—You are; lokasya—of all the world; cara—moving;
acarasya—nonmoving; tvam—You are; asya—of this; pūjyaḥ—worshipable; ca—also;
guruḥ—master; garīyān—glorious; na—never; tvat-samaḥ—equal to You; asti—there
is; abhyadhikaḥ—greater; kutaḥ—how is it possible; anyaḥ—other; loka-traye—in
three planetary systems; api—also; apratima—immeasurable; prabhāva—power.

TRANSLATION

You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the worshipable chief,
the spiritual master. No one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You.
Within the three worlds, You are immeasurable.

PURPORT

The Lord Kṛṣṇa is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son. He is the
spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic instructions to Brahmā,
and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna; therefore He is
the original spiritual master, and any bona fide spiritual master at the present
moment must be a descendant in the line of disciplic succession stemming from
Kṛṣṇa. Without being a representative of Kṛṣṇa, one cannot become a teacher or
spiritual master of transcendental subject matter.

The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of immeasurable
greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa,
because no one is equal to or higher than Kṛṣṇa within any manifestation,
spiritual or material. Everyone is below Him. No one can excel Him.

The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but for Him
there is no difference between His senses, body, mind and Himself. Foolish
persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Kṛṣṇa is different from His soul,
mind, heart and everything else. Kṛṣṇa is absolute; therefore His activities and
potencies are supreme. It is also stated that He does not have senses like ours.
He can perform all sensual activities; therefore His senses are neither
imperfect nor limited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to
Him, and everyone is lower than Him.

Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, after quitting
his body, returns to Him and doesn’t come back again to this miserable world.
Therefore one should know that Kṛṣṇa’s activities are different from others. The
best policy is to follow the principles of Kṛṣṇa; that will make one perfect. It
is also stated that there is no one who is master of Kṛṣṇa; everyone is His
servant. Only Kṛṣṇa is God, and everyone is servant. Everyone is complying with
His order. There is no one who can deny His order. Everyone is acting according
to His direction, being under His superintendence. As stated in the
Brahmā-saṁhitā, He is the cause of all causes.

### 11.44


tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁ

prasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyam

piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ

priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum

tasmāt—therefore; praṇamya—after offering obeisances; praṇidhāya—laying down;
kāyam—body; prasādaye—to beg mercy; tvām—unto you; aham—I; īśam—unto the Supreme
Lord; īḍyam—who is worshipable; pitā iva—like a father; putrasya—of a son; sakhā
iva—like a friend; sakhyuḥ—of a friend; priyaḥ—lover; priyāyāḥ—of the dearmost;
arhasi—You should; deva—my Lord; soḍhum—tolerate.

TRANSLATION

You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall
down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please tolerate the wrongs
that I may have done to You and bear with me as a father with his son, or a
friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved.

PURPORT

Kṛṣṇa’s devotees relate to Kṛṣṇa in various relationships; one might treat Kṛṣṇa
as a son, one might treat Kṛṣṇa as a husband, as a friend, as a master, etc.
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the father tolerates, or the
husband or master tolerates, so Kṛṣṇa tolerates.


### 11.45


adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvā

bhayena ca pravyathitaṁ mano me

tad eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁ

prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa

adṛṣṭa-pūrvam—never seen before; hṛṣitaḥ—gladdened; asmi—I am; dṛṣṭvā—by seeing;
bhayena—out of fear; ca—also; pravyathitam—perturbed; manaḥ—mind; me—mine;
tat—therefore; eva—certainly; me—unto me; darśaya—show; deva—O Lord; rūpam—the
form; prasīda—just be gracious; deveśa—O Lord of lords; jagat-nivāsa—the refuge
of the universe.

TRANSLATION

After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore please
bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as the Personality of
Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.

PURPORT

Arjuna is always in confidence with Kṛṣṇa because he is a very dear friend, and
as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend’s opulence, Arjuna is very joyful to
see that his friend, Kṛṣṇa, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and can show
such a wonderful universal form. But at the same time, after seeing that
universal form, he is afraid that he has committed so many offenses to Kṛṣṇa out
of his unalloyed friendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear, although he
had no reason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Kṛṣṇa to show His Nārāyaṇa
form because He can assume any form. This universal form is material and
temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the Vaikuṇṭha planets He
has His transcendental form with four hands as Nārāyaṇa. There are innumerable
planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of them Kṛṣṇa is present by His
plenary manifestations of different names. Thus Arjuna desired to see one of the
forms manifest in the Vaikuṇṭha planets. Of course in each Vaikuṇṭha planet the
form of Nārāyaṇa is four-handed, and the four hands hold different symbols, the
conchshell, mace, lotus and disc. According to the different hands these four
things are held in, the Nārāyaṇas are named. All of these forms are one and the
same to Kṛṣṇa; therefore Arjuna requests to see His four-handed feature.

### 11.46


kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakra-hastam

icchāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum ahaṁ tathaiva

tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena

sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte

kirīṭinam—with helmet; gadinam—with club; cakra-hastam—disc in hand; icchāmi—I
wish; tvām—You; draṣṭum—to see; aham—I; tathā eva—in that position; tena eva—by
that; rūpeṇa—with form; catur-bhujena—four-handed; sahasra-bāho—O
thousand-handed one; bhava—just become; viśva-mūrte—O universal form.

TRANSLATION

O universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with helmeted head
and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your hands. I long to see You in
that form.

PURPORT

In the Brahmā-saṁhitā it is stated that the Lord is eternally situated in
hundreds and thousands of forms, and the main forms are those like Rāma,
Nṛsiṁha, Nārāyaṇa, etc. There are innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Kṛṣṇa
is the original Personality of Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He
is now asking to see the form of Nārāyaṇa, a spiritual form. This verse
establishes without any doubt the statement of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that Kṛṣṇa
is the original Personality of Godhead and all other features originate from
Him. He is not different from His plenary expansions, and He is God in any of
His innumerable forms. In all of these forms He is fresh like a young man. That
is the constant feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows
Kṛṣṇa at once becomes free from all contamination of the material world.

### 11.47


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁ

rūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam ātma-yogāt

tejo-mayaṁ viśvam anantam ādyaṁ

yan me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayā—by Me;
prasannena—happily; tava—unto you; arjuna—O Arjuna; idam—this; rūpam—form;
param—transcendental; darśitam—shown; ātma-yogāt—by My internal potency;
tejomayam—full of effulgence; viśvam—the entire universe; anantam—unlimited;
ādyam—original; yat me—that which is Mine; tvat-anyena—besides you; na
dṛṣṭa-pūrvam—no one has previously seen.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this universal form
within the material world by My internal potency. No one before you has ever
seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.

PURPORT

Arjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so out of His mercy
upon His devotee Arjuna, Lord Kṛṣṇa showed His universal form full of effulgence
and opulence. This form was glaring like the sun, and its many faces were
rapidly changing. Kṛṣṇa showed this form just to satisfy the desire of His
friend Arjuna. This form was manifested by Kṛṣṇa through His internal potency,
which is inconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal form
of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna, other
devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outer space could also
see it. They did not see it before, but because of Arjuna they were also able to
see it. In other words, all the disciplic devotees of the Lord could see the
universal form which was shown to Arjuna by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Someone
commented that this form was shown to Duryodhana also when Kṛṣṇa went to
Duryodhana to negotiate for peace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the
peace offer, but at that time Kṛṣṇa manifested some of His universal forms. But
those forms are different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that
no one has ever seen this form before.
