Devotional Service

### 12.1


arjuna uvāca

evaṁ satata-yuktā ye

bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate

ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ

teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; evam—thus; satata—always; yuktāḥ—engaged; ye—those;
bhaktāḥ—devotees; tvām—unto You; paryupāsate—properly worship; ye—those;
ca—also; api—again; akṣaram—beyond the senses; avyaktam—unmanifested; teśām—of
them; ke—who; yoga-vittamāḥ—the most perfect.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: Which is considered to be more perfect: those who are properly
engaged in Your devotional service, or those who worship the impersonal Brahman,
the unmanifested?

PURPORT

Kṛṣṇa has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the universal and
has described all kinds of devotees and yogīs. Generally, the transcendentalists
can be divided into two classes. One is the impersonalist, and the other is the
personalist. The personalist devotee engages himself with all energy in the
service of the Supreme Lord. The impersonalist engages himself not directly in
the service of Kṛṣṇa but in meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the
unmanifested.

We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realization of the
Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the highest. If one at all
desires to have the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then he
must take to devotional service.

Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional service are called
personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on the impersonal
Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is here questioning which position is
better. There are different ways to realize the Absolute Truth, but Kṛṣṇa
indicates in this chapter that bhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is
highest of all. It is the most direct, and it is the easiest means for
association with the Godhead.

In the Second Chapter the Lord explains that a living entity is not the material
body but is a spiritual spark, a part of the Absolute Truth. In the Seventh
Chapter He speaks of the living entity as part and parcel of the supreme whole
and recommends that he transfer his attention fully to the whole. In the Eighth
Chapter it is stated that whoever thinks of Kṛṣṇa at the moment of death is at
once transferred to the spiritual sky, Kṛṣṇa’s abode. And at the end of the
Sixth Chapter the Lord says that out of all the yogīs, he who thinks of Kṛṣṇa
within himself is considered to be the most perfect. So throughout the Gītā
personal devotion to Kṛṣṇa is recommended as the highest form of spiritual
realization. Yet there are those who are still attracted to Kṛṣṇa’s impersonal
brahmajyoti effulgence, which is the all-pervasive aspect of the Absolute Truth
and which is unmanifest and beyond the reach of the senses. Arjuna would like to
know which of these two types of transcendentalists is more perfect in
knowledge. In other words, he is clarifying his own position because he is
attached to the personal form of Kṛṣṇa. He is not attached to the impersonal
Brahman. He wants to know whether his position is secure. The impersonal
manifestation, either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the
Supreme Lord, is a problem for meditation. Actually, one cannot perfectly
conceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Therefore Arjuna wants
to say, “What is the use of such a waste of time?” Arjuna experienced in the
Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personal form of Kṛṣṇa is best
because he could thus understand all other forms at the same time and there was
no disturbance to his love for Kṛṣṇa. This important question asked of Kṛṣṇa by
Arjuna will clarify the distinction between the impersonal and personal
conceptions of the Absolute Truth.

### 12.2


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ

nitya-yuktā upāsate

śraddhayā parayopetās

te me yuktatamā matāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi—unto Me;
āveśya—fixing; manaḥ—mind; ye—one who; mām—unto Me; nitya—always;
yuktāḥ—engaged; upāsate—worships; śraddhayā—with faith; parayā—transcendental;
upetāḥ—engages; te—they; me—Mine; yuktatamāḥ—most perfect; matāḥ—I consider.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal form, always
engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith, is considered by
Me to be most perfect.

PURPORT

In answer to Arjuna’s question, Kṛṣṇa clearly says that he who concentrates upon
His personal form and who worships Him with faith and devotion is to be
considered most perfect in yoga. For one in such Kṛṣṇa consciousness there are
no material activities because everything is done by Kṛṣṇa. A pure devotee is
constantly engaged—sometimes he chants, sometimes he hears or reads books about
Kṛṣṇa, or sometimes he cooks prasādam or goes to the marketplace to purchase
something for Kṛṣṇa, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes—whatever he
does, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting his activities to
Kṛṣṇa Such action is in full samādhi.

### 12.3-4


ye tv akṣaram anirdeśyam

avyaktaṁ paryupāsate

sarvatra-gam acintyaṁ ca

kūṭa-stham acalaṁ dhruvam

sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ

sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ

te prāpnuvanti mām eva

sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

ye—those; tu—but; akṣaram—which is beyond the perception of the senses;
anirdeśyam—indefinite; avyaktam—unmanifested; paryupāsate—completely engages;
sarvatra-gam—all-pervading; acintyam—inconceivable; ca—also; kūṭastham—in the
center; acalam—immovable; dhruvam—fixed; sanniyamya—controlling;
indriya-grāmam—all the senses; sarvatra—everywhere; sama-buddayaḥ—equally
disposed; te—they; prāpnuvanti—achieve; mām—unto Me; eva—certainly;
sarva-bhūta-hite—all living entities’ welfare; ratāḥ—engaged.

TRANSLATION

But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond the
perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, fixed, and
immovable—the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth—by controlling the
various senses and being equally disposed to everyone, such persons, engaged in
the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.

PURPORT

Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, but who attempt to
achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also ultimately achieve the
supreme goal, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as is stated, “After many births the man of wisdom
seeks refuge in Me, knowing Vāsudeva is all.” When a person comes to full
knowledge after many births, he surrenders unto Lord Kṛṣṇa. If one approaches
the Godhead by the method mentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses,
render service to everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is
inferred that one has to approach Lord Kṛṣṇa, otherwise there is no perfect
realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully surrenders
unto Him.

In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has to cease
the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc. Then one comes
to understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere. Realizing this, one
envies no living entity—he sees no difference between man and animal because he
sees soul only, not the outer covering. But for the common man, this method of
impersonal realization is very difficult.

### 12.5


kleśo ’dhikataras teṣām

avyaktāsakta-cetasām

avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ

dehavadbhir avāpyate

kleśaḥ—trouble; adhikataraḥ—more troublesome; teṣām—of them;
avyakta—unmanifested; āsakta—being attached; cetasām—of those whose minds;
avyaktā—unmanifested; hi—certainly; gatiḥ duḥkham—progress is troublesome;
dehavadbhiḥ—of the embodiments; avāpyate—achieve.

TRANSLATION

For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature of
the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make progrese in that
discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.

PURPORT

The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the inconceivable,
unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are called jñāna-yogīs, and
persons who are in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, engaged in devotional service to
the Lord, are called bhakti-yogīs. Now, here the difference between jñāna-yoga
and bhakti-yoga is definitely expressed. The process of jñāna-yoga, although
ultimately bringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path
of bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul. The
individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very difficult for him
to simply theoretically understand that he is not the body. Therefore, the
bhakti-yogī accepts the Deity of Kṛṣṇa as worshipable because there is some
bodily conception fixed in the mind, which can thus be applied. Of course,
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple is
not idol worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may be
saguṇa and nirguṇa—of the Supreme possessing or not possessing attributes.
Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguṇa worship, for the Lord is
represented by material qualities. But the form of the Lord, though represented
by material qualities such as stone, wood, or oil paint, is not actually
material. That is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord.

A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the street, and
if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally go to their
destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an imitation, which we may
find somewhere, which is not authorized by the post office, will not do the
work. Similarly, God has an authorized representation in the Deity form, which
is called arca-vigraha. This arca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord.
God will accept service through that form. The Lord is omnipotent and
all-powerful; therefore, by His incarnation as arca-vigraha, He can accept the
services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in conditioned
life.

So, for a devotee, there is no difficulty in approaching the Supreme immediately
and directly, but for those who are following the impersonal way to spiritual
realization, the path is difficult. They have to understand the unmanifested
representation of the Supreme through such Vedic literatures as the Upaniṣads,
and they have to learn the language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and
they have to realize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common
man. A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply by
the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offering regulative
obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of the Lord, and simply
by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Lord, realizes the Supreme
Personality of Godhead very easily. There is no doubt that the impersonalists
are unnecessarily taking a troublesome path with the risk of not realizing the
Absolute Truth at the ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk,
trouble, or difficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similar
passage appears in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It is stated there that if one has to
ultimately surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead (This surrendering
process is called bhakti.), but instead takes the trouble to understand what is
Brahman and what is not Brahman and spends his whole life in that way, the
result is simply troublesome. Therefore it is advised here that one should not
take up this troublesome path of self-realization because there is uncertainty
in the ultimate result.

A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to merge into
the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization of the eternal and
knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but the blissful portion is not
realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a transcendentalist, highly learned
in the process of jñāna-yoga, may come to the point of bhakti-yoga, or
devotional service. At that time, long practice in impersonalism also becomes a
source of trouble, because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied
soul is always in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practice
and at the time of realization. Every living soul is partially independant, and
one should know for certain that this unmanifested realization is against the
nature of his spiritual blissful self. One should not take up this process. For
every individual living entity the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which entails
full engagement in devotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore
this devotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thus this
process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the inconceivable, which is
beyond the approach of the senses, as already expressed in this verse, should
never be encouraged at any time, especially in this age. It is not advised by
Lord Kṛṣṇa.

### 12.6-7


ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi

mayi sannyasya mat-parāḥ

ananyenaiva yogena

māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate

teṣām ahaṁ samuddhartā

mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt

bhavāmi na cirāt pārtha

mayy āveśita-cetasām

ye—one who; tu—but; sarvāṇi—everything; karmāṇi—activities; mayi—unto Me;
sannyasya—giving up; mat-parāḥ—being attached to Me; ananyena—without division;
eva—certainly; yogena—by practice of such bhakti-yoga; mām—unto Me;
dhyāyantaḥ—meditating; upāsate—worship; teṣām—of them; aham—I;
samuddhartā—deliverer; mṛtyu—that; saṁsāra—material existence; sāgarāt—from the
ocean; bhavāmi—become; na cirāt—not a long time; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā;
mayi—unto Me; āveśita—fixed; cetasām—of those whose minds are like that.

TRANSLATION

For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being devoted
to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and always meditating
upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of Pṛthā, for him I am the swift
deliverer from the ocean of birth and death.

PURPORT

It is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In pure devotional
service one comes to the realization that God is great and that the individual
soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render service to the Lord—if not,
then he will render service to māyā.

As stated before, the Supreme Lord can only be appreciated by devotional
service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One should fix his mind fully
on Kṛṣṇa in order to achieve Him. One should work only for Kṛṣṇa. It does not
matter in what kind of work one engages, but that work should be done only for
Kṛṣṇa. That is the standard of devotional service. The devotee does not desire
any achievement other than pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His
life’s mission is to please Kṛṣṇa, and he can sacrifice everything for Kṛṣṇa’s
satisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kurukṣetra. The process is
very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation and engage at the same
time in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare
Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Such transcendental chanting attracts the devotee to
the Personality of Godhead.

The Supreme Lord herein promises that He will without delay deliver a pure
devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Those who are
advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to whatever planet
they like by the yoga process, and others take the opportunity in various ways,
but as far as the devotee is concerned, it is clearly stated here that the Lord
Himself takes him. He does not need to wait to become very experienced in order
to transfer himself to the spiritual sky.

In the Varāha Purāṇa this verse appears:

nayāmi paramaṁ sthānam arcirādi-gatiṁ vinā garuḍa-skandham āropya yatheccham
anivāritaḥ

The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
aṣṭāṅga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets. The
responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearly states here that
He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child is completely cared for by his
parents, and thus his position is secure. Similarly, a devotee does not need to
endeavor to transfer himself by yoga practice to other planets. Rather, the
Supreme Lord, by His great mercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier
Garuḍa, and at once delivers the devotee from this material existence. Although
a man who has fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very expert
in swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks him up from
the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picks up the devotee
from this material existence. One simply has to practice the easy process of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and fully engage himself in devotional service. Any
intelligent man should always prefer the process of devotional service to all
other paths. In the Nārāyaṇīya this is confirmed as follows:

yā vai sādhana-sampatti-puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye tayā vinā tad-āpnoti naro
nārāyaṇāśrayaḥ

The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the different
processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by the mental speculative
process. One who is devoted to the Supreme Personality can attain all the
benefits derived from other yogic processes, speculation, rituals, sacrifices,
charities, etc. That is the specific benediction of devotional service.

Simply by chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—a devotee of the Lord can
approach the supreme destination easily and happily, but this destination cannot
be approached by any other process of religion.

The conclusion of Bhagavad-gītā is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:

sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ.

One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply execute
devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That will enable one to reach the
highest perfection of life. There is no need for one to consider the sinful
actions of his past life because the Supreme Lord fully takes charge of him.
Therefore one should not futilely try to deliver himself in spiritual
realization. Let everyone take shelter of the supreme omnipotent Godhead Kṛṣṇa.
That is the highest perfection of life.
