### 12.15


yasmān nodvijate loko

lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ

harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair

mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ

yasmāt—from whom; na—never; udvijate—agītātes; lokaḥ—persons; lokāt—persons;
na—never; advijate—disturbed; ca—also; yaḥ—anyone; harṣa—happiness;
amarṣa—distress; bhaya—fearfulness; udvegaiḥ—with anxiety; muktaḥ—freed;
yaḥ—who; saḥ—anyone; ca—also; me—My; priyaḥ—very dear.

TRANSLATION

He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not dirturbed by anxiety,
who is steady in happiness and distress, is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A few of a devotee’s qualifications are further being described. No one is put
into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness, or dissatisfaction by such a devotee.
Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such a way to put others
into anxiety. At the same time, if others try to put a devotee into anxiety, he
is not disturbed. It is by the grace of the Lord that he is so practiced that he
is not disturbed by any outward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is
always engrossed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engaged in devotional service, all
such material circumstances cannot woo him. Generally a materialistic person
becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratification and his
body, but when he sees that others have something for their sense gratification
and he hasn’t, he is sorry and envious. When he is expecting some retaliation
from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and when he cannot successfully execute
something he becomes dejected. But a devotee is always transcendental to all
these disturbances; therefore he is very dear to Kṛṣṇa.

### 12.16


anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa

udāsīno gata-vyathaḥ

sarvārambha-parityāgī

yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ

anapekṣaḥ—neutral; śuciḥ—pure; dakṣaḥ—expert; udāsīnaḥ—free from care;
gata-vyathaḥ—freed from all distress; sarva-ārambha—all endeavors;
parityāgī—renouncer; yaḥ—anyone; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; saḥ—he; me—Me;
priyaḥ—very dear

TRANSLATION

A devotee who is not dependant on the ordinary course of activities, who is
pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and who does not strive for
some result, is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to acquire it. If
automatically, by the grace of the Supreme, money comes to him, he is not
agītāted. Naturally a devotee takes bath at least twice in a day and rises early
in the morning for devotional service. Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly
and outwardly. A devotee is always expert because he fully knows the sense of
all activities of life, and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A
devotee never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree. He
is never pained because he is free from all designations; he knows that his body
is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, he is free. The pure
devotee does not endeavor for anything which is against the principles of
devotional service. For example, constructing a big building requires great
energy, and a devotee does not take to such business if it does not benefit him
by advancing his devotional service. He may construct a temple for the Lord, and
for that he may take all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big house
for his personal relations.

### 12.17


yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

śubhāśubha-parityāgī

bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ

yaḥ—one who: na—never; hṛṣyati—takes pleasure; na—never; dveṣṭi—grieves;
na—never; śocati—laments; na—never; kāṅkṣati—desires; śubha—auspicious;
aśubha—inauspicious; parityāgī—renouncer; bhaktimān—devotee; yaḥ—one who; saḥ—he
is; me—My; priyaḥ—dear.

TRANSLATION

One who neither grasps pleasure or grief, who neither laments nor desires, and
who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things, is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and loss, nor
is he very much anxious to get a son or disciple, nor is he distressed by not
getting them. If he loses anything which is very dear to him, he does not
lament. Similarly, if he does not get what he desires, he is not distressed. He
is transcendental in the face of all kinds of auspicious, inauspicious and
sinful activities. He is prepared to accept all kinds of risks for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of
his devotional service. Such a devotee is very dear to Kṛṣṇa.

### 12.18-19


samaḥ śatrau ca mitre ca

tathā mānāpamānayoḥ

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu

samaḥ saṅga-vivarjitaḥ

tulya-nindā-stutir maunī

santuṣṭo yena kenacit

aniketaḥ sthira-matir

bhaktimān me priyo naraḥ

samaḥ—equal; śatrau—to the enemy; ca—also; mitre—to friends; ca—also; tatha—so;
māna—honor; apamānayoḥ—dishonor; śīta—cold; uṣṇa—heat; sukha—happiness;
duḥkheṣu—distress; samaḥ—equiposed; saṅga-vivarjitaḥ—free from all association;
tulya—equal; nindā—defamation; stutiḥ—repute; maunī—silent; santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied;
yena—somehow; kena—or other; cit—if; aniketaḥ—having no residence; sthira—fixed;
matiḥ—determination; bhaktimān—engaged in devotion; me—My; priyaḥ—dear; naraḥ—a
man.

TRANSLATION

One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equiposed in honor and dishonor,
heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who is always free from
contamination, always silent and satisfied with anything, who doesn’t care for
any residence, who is fixed in knowledge and engaged in devotional service, is
very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is praised and
sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human society. But a devotee is
always transcendental to artificial fame and infamy, distress or happiness. He
is very patient. He does not speak of anything but the topics about Kṛṣṇa;
therefore he is called silent. Silent does not mean that one should not speak;
silent means that one should not speak nonsense. One should speak only of
essentials, and the most essential speech for the devotee is to speak of the
Supreme Lord. He is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatable
foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care for any
residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, and he may
sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to neither. He is
called fixed because he is fixed in his determination and knowledge. We may find
some repetition in the descriptions of the qualifications of a devotee, but this
is just to give an illustration of the fact that a devotee must acquire all
these qualifications. Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee.
One who is not a devotee has no good qualification. One who wants to be
recognized as a devotee should develop the good qualifications. Of course he
does not extraneously endeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service automatically helps him develop
them.

### 12.20


ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ

yathoktaṁ paryupāsate

śraddadhānā mat-paramā

bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ

ye—one who; tu—but; dharmya—generosity; amṛtam—understanding; idam—this;
yathā—as; uktam—said; paryupāsate—completely engages; sraddadhānāḥ—with faith;
mat-paramāḥ—taking the Supreme Lord as everything; bhaktāḥ—devotees; te—such
persons; atīva—very, very; me—Me; priyāḥ—dear.

TRANSLATION

He who follows this imperishable path of devotional service and who completely
engages himself with faith, making Me the supreme goal, is very, very dear to
Me.

PURPORT

In this chapter the religion of eternal engagement, the explanation of the
process of transcendental service for approaching the Supreme Lord, is given.
This process is very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a person who is engaged in
such a process. The question who is better—one who is engaged in the path of
impersonal Brahman or one who is engaged in the personal service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead—was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so
explicitly that there is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of
Godhead is the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words,
in this chapter it is decided that through good association, one develops
attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a bona fide spiritual
master and from him begins to hear and chant and observe the regulative
principles of devotional service with faith, attachment and devotion and thus
becomes engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord. This path is
recommended in this chapter; therefore there is no doubt that devotional service
is the only absolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme
Absolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up to the time
one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words, as long as one does
not have the chance to associate with a pure devotee, the impersonal conception
may be beneficial. In the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth one works
without fruitive result, meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit
and matter. This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a pure
devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need to undergo step by
step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional service, as described in
the middle six chapters of Bhagavad-gītā, is more congenial. One need not bother
about materials to keep body and soul together because by the grace of the Lord
everything is carried out automatically.
