Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness

### 13.1-2


arjuna uvāca

prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva

kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam eva ca

etad veditum icchāmi

jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava

śrī-bhagavān uvāca

idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya

kṣetram ity abhidhīyate

etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ

kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

arjunaḥ uvāca—Arjuna said; prakṛtim—nature; puruṣam—the enjoyer; ca—also;
eva—certainly; kṣetram—body; kṣetrajñam—knower of the body; eva—certainly;
ca—also; etat—all this; veditum—to understand; icchāmi—I wish; jñānam—knowledge;
jñeyam—the object of knowledge; ca—also; keśava—O Kṛṣṇa; śrī bhagavān uvāca—the
Personality of Godhead said; idam—this; śarīram—body; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī;
kṣetram—the field; iti—thus; abhidhīyate—is called; etat—this; yaḥ—anyone;
vetti—knows; tam—him; prāhuḥ—is called; kṣetrajñaḥ—knower of the body; iti—thus;
tat-vidaḥ—one who knows.

**TRANSLATION**

Arjuna said: O my dear Kṛṣṇa, I wish to know about prakṛti [nature], Puruṣa [the
enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of knowledge and the
end of knowledge. The Blessed Lord then said: This body, O son of Kuntī, is
called the field, and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.

**PURPORT**

Arjuna was inquisitive about prakṛti or nature, puruṣa, the enjoyer, kṣetra, the
field, kṣetrajña, its knower, and of knowledge and the object of knowledge. When
he inquired about all these, Kṛṣṇa said that this body is called the field and
that one who knows this body is called the knower of the field. This body is the
field of activity for the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in
material existence, and he attempts to lord over material nature. And so,
according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a field of
activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body? The body is
made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sense gratification, and,
according to his capacity to enjoy sense gratification, he is offered a body, or
field of activity. Therefore the body is called kṣetra, or the field of activity
for the conditioned soul. Now, the person who does not identify himself with the
body is called kṣetrajña, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult to
understand the difference between the field and its knower, the body and the
knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhood to old age he
undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still one person, remaining. Thus
there is a difference between the knower of the field of activities and the
actual field of activities. A living conditioned soul can thus understand that
he is different from the body. It is described in the beginning—dehe ’smin—that
the living entity is within the body and that the body is changing from
childhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and
the person who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner is
distinctly kṣetrajña. Sometimes we understand that I am happy, I am mad, I am a
woman, I am a dog, I am a cat: these are the knowers. The knower is different
from the field. Although we use many articles—our clothes, etc.—we know- that we
are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand by a little
contemplation that we are different from the body.

In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gītā, the knower of the body, the living
entity, and the position by which he can understand the Supreme Lord are
described. In the middle six chapters of the Gītā, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul and the Supersoul in
regard to devotional service are described. The superior position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the subordinate position of the individual soul are
definitely defined in these chapters. The living entities are subordinate under
all circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. When
enlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord in different
capacities—as the distressed, those in want of money, the inquisitive, and those
in search of knowledge. That is also described. Now, starting with the
Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comes into contact with material
nature, how he is delivered by the Supreme Lord through the different methods of
fruitive activities, cultivation of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional
service are explained. Although the living entity is completely different from
the material body, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.

### 13.3


kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi

sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata

kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ

yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

kṣetrajñam—the knower; ca—also; api—certainly; mām—Me; viddhi—know; sarva—all;
kṣetreṣu—in bodily fields; bhārata—O son of Bharata; kṣetra—field of activities
(the body); kṣetrajñayoḥ—the knower of the field; jñānam—knowledge; yat—that
which is taught; tat—that; jñānam—knowledge; matam—opinion; mama—that.

**TRANSLATION**

O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all
bodies, and to understand this body and its owner is called knowledge. That is
My opinion.

**PURPORT**

While discussing the subject of this body and the owner of the body, the soul
and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics of study: the Lord, the
1iving entity, and matter. In every field of activities, in every body, there
are two souls: the individual soul and the Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is
the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa says,
“I am also the knower, but I am not the individual owner of the body. I am the
superknower. I am present in every body as the Paramātmā, or Supersoul.”

One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and the knower of
the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gītā, can attain to
knowledge.

The Lord says: “I am the knower of the field of activities in every individual
body.” The individual may be the knower of his own body, but he is not in
knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present as
the Supersoul in all bodies, knows everything about all bodies. He knows all the
different bodies of all the various species of life. A citizen may know
everything about his patch of land, but the king knows not only his palace but
all the properties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one may be
the proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is the proprietor
of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of the kingdom, and the
citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the supreme
proprietor of all bodies.

The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hṛṣīkeśa, which means
controller of the senses. He is the original controller of the senses, just as
the king is the original controller of all the activities of the state, and the
citizens are secondary controllers. The Lord also says: “I am also the knower.”
This means that He is the superknower; the individual soul knows only his
particular body. In the Vedic literature, it is stated as follows:

kṣetrāṇi hi śarīrāṇi bījaṁ cāpi śubhāśubhe tāni vetti sa yogātmā tataḥ kṣetrajña
ucyate.

This body is called the kṣetra, and within it dwells the owner of the body and
the Supreme Lord who knows both the body and the owner of the body. Therefore He
is called the knower of all fields. The distinction between the field of
activities, the owner of activities and the supreme owner of activities is
described as follows. Perfect knowledge of the constitution of the body, the
constitution of the individual soul, and the constitution of the Supersoul is
known in terms of Vedic literature as jñānam. That is the opinion of Kṛṣṇa. To
understand both the soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is knowledge. One
who does not understand the field of activity and the knower of activity is not
in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position of prakṛti, nature, and
puruṣa, the enjoyer of the nature, and īśvara, the knower who dominates or
controls nature and the individual soul. One should not confuse the three in
their different capacities. One should not confuse the painter, the painting and
the easel. This material world, which is the field of activities, is nature, and
the enjoyer of nature is the living entity, and above them both is the supreme
controller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vedic language:
“bhoktā bhogyaṁ preritāraṁ ca matvā sarvaṁ proktaṁ tri-vidhaṁ brahmam etat.”
There are three Brahman conceptions: prakṛti is Brahman as the field of
activities, and the jīva (individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to
control material nature, and the controller of both of them is also Brahman, but
He is the factual controller.

In this chapter it will be also explained that out of the two knowers, one is
fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and the other is
subordinate. One who understands the two knowers of the field to be one and the
same contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead who states here very clearly
that “I am also the knower of the field of activity.” One who misunderstands a
rope to be a serpent is not in knowledge. There are different kinds of bodies,
and there are different owners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has
his individual capacity of lording it over material nature, there are different
bodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. The word ca
is significant, for it indicates the total number of bodies. That is the opinion
of Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa: Kṛṣṇa is the Supersoul present in each and every
body apart from the individual soul. And Kṛṣṇa explicitly says here that the
Supersoul is the controller of both the field of activities and the finite
enjoyer.

### 13.4


tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca

yad-vikāri yataś ca yat

sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca

tat samāsena me śṛṇu

tat—that; kṣetram—field of activities; yat—as; ca—also; yādṛk—as it is; ca—also;
yat—what is; vikāri—changes; yataḥ—from which; ca—also; yat—one; saḥ—he;
ca—also; yaḥ—one; yat—which; prabhāvaḥ ca—influence also; tat—that; samāsena—in
detail; me—from Me; śṛṇu—understand.

**TRANSLATION**

Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is
constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who that knower of the
field of activities is, and what his influences are.

**PURPORT**

The Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the field of
activities in their constitutional positions. One has to know how this body is
constituted, the materials of which this body is made, under whose control this
body is working, how the changes are taking place, wherefrom the changes are
coming, what the causes are, what the reasons are, what the ultimate goal of the
individual is, and what the actual form of the individual soul is. One should
also know the distinction between the individual living soul and the Supersoul,
the different influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to understand this
Bhagavad-gītā directly from the description given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one should be careful not to
consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every body and individual soul to
be the jīva. This is something like equalizing the potent and the impotent.

### 13.5


ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ

chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak

brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva

hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ

ṛṣibhiḥ—by the wise sages; bahudhā—in many ways; gītām—described;
chandobhiḥ—Vedic hymns; vividhaiḥ—in various; pṛthak—variously; brahma-sūtra—the
Vedānta; padaiḥ—aphorism; ca—also; eva—certainly; hetumadbhiḥ—with cause and
effect; viniścitaiḥ—ascertain.

**TRANSLATION**

That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is
described by various sages in various Vedic writings—especially in the
Vedānta-sūtra—and is presented with all reasoning as to cause and effect.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learned scholars and
standard authorities always give evidence from previous authorities. Kṛṣṇa is
explaining this most controversial point regarding the duality and non-duality
of the soul and the Supersoul by referring to Scriptures, the Vedānta, which are
accepted as authority. First, He says, this is according to different sages. As
far as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyāsadeva, the author of the
Vedānta-sūtra, is a great sage, and in the Vedānta-sūtra duality is perfectly
explained. And Vyāsadeva’s father, Parāśara, was also a great sage, and he
writes in his books of religiosity: “aham tvaṁ ca athānye…” “We—you, I and
various other living entities—are all transcendental, although in material
bodies. Now we are fallen into the ways of the three modes of material nature
according to our different karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some
are in the lower nature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and
are being manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But the
Supersoul, which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the three qualities of
nature and is transcendental.” Similarly, in the original Vedas, a distinction
between the soul, the Supersoul and the body is made, especially in the Kaṭha
Upaniṣad.

There is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord’s energy known as annamaya by which
one depends simply upon food for existence. This is a materialistic realization
of the Supreme. Then there is prāṇamaya; this means that after realizing the
Supreme Absolute Truth in foodstuff, one can realize the Absolute Truth in the
living symptoms, or life forms. In jñānamaya the living symptom develops to the
point of thinking, feeling, and willing. Then there is Brahman realization and
the realization called vijñānamaya by which the living entity’s mind and life
symptoms are distinguished from the living entity himself. The next and supreme
stage is ānandamaya, realization of the all-blissful nature. Thus there are five
stages of Brahman realization, which is called brahma puccham. Out of these the
first three—annamaya, prāṇamaya, and jñānamaya—involve the fields of activities
of the living entities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is the
Supreme Lord, who is called ānandamaya. In the Vedānta-sūtra also the Supreme is
called ānandamayo ’bhyāsāt. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is by nature full
of joy, and to enjoy His transcendental bliss, He expands into vijñānamaya,
prāṇamaya, jñānamaya, and annamaya. In this field of activities the living
entity is considered to be the enjoyer, and different from him is the
ānandamaya. That means that if the living entity decides to enjoy, in
dovetailing himself with the ānandamaya, then he becomes perfect. This is the
real picture of the Supreme Lord, as supreme knower of the field, the living
entity, as subordinate knower, and the nature of the field of activities.

### 13.6-7


mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro

buddhir avyaktam eva ca

indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca

pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ

icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ

saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ

etat kṣetraṁ samāsena

sa-vikāram udāhṛtam

mahā-bhūtāni—great elements; ahaṅkāraḥ—false ego; buddhiḥ—intelligence;
avyaktam—the unmanifested; eva—certainly; ca—also; indriyāṇi—senses ; daśa
ekam—eleven; ca—also; pañca—five; ca—also; indriya-gocarāḥ—objects of the
senses; icchā—desire; dveṣaḥ—hatred; sukham—happiness; duḥkham—distress;
saṅghataḥ—the aggregate; cetanā—living symptoms; dhṛtiḥ—conviction; etat—all
this; kṣetram—field of activities; samāsena—in summary; sa-vikāram—interaction;
udāhṛtam—exemplified.

**TRANSLATION**

The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten
senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress,
the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions—all these are considered, in
summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.

**PURPORT**

From all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic hymns and
the aphorisms of the Vedānta-sūtra, the components of this world are earth,
water, fire, air and ether. These are the five great elements (mahābhūta). Then
there are false ego, intelligence and the unmanifested stage of the three modes
of nature. Then there are five senses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears,
nose, tongue and touch. Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, the anus
and the genitals. Then, above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and
which can be called the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there are
eleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of the senses: smell,
taste, warmth, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of these twenty-four elements
is called the field of activity. If one makes an analytical study of these
twenty-four subjects, then he can very well understand the field of activity.
Then there is desire, hatred, pleasure and pain, which are interactions,
representations of the five great elements in the gross body. The living
symptoms, represented by consciousness and conviction, are the manifestation of
the subtle body—mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are included
within the field of activities.

The five great elements are a gross representation of the subtle false ego. They
are a representation in the material conception. Consciousness is represented by
intelligence, of which the unmanifested stage is the three modes of material
nature. The unmanifested three modes of material nature is called pradhāna.

One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with their
interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gītā, a
summary only is given.

The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are changes of
the body, which are six in number: the body is born, it grows, it stays, it
produces by-products, then begins to decay, and at the last stage it vanishes.
Therefore the field is a nonpermanent material thing. However, the kṣetrajña,
the knower of the field, its proprietor, is different.
