### 13.13


jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi

yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute

anādi mat-paraṁ brahma

na sat tan nāsad ucyate

jñeyam—knowable; yat—that; tat—which; pravakṣyāmi—I shall now explain;
yat—which; jñātvā—knowing; amṛtam—nectar; aśnute—taste; anādi—beginningless;
mat-param—subordinate to Me; brahma—spirit; na—neither; sat—cause; tat—that;
na—nor; asat—effect; ucyate—is called.

**TRANSLATION**

I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal. This
is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me. It is called Brahman, the spirit,
and it lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.

**PURPORT**

The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the field. He
has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the field of activities.
Now He is explaining the knowable, both the soul and the Supersoul respectively.
By knowledge of the knower, both the soul and the Supersoul, one can relish the
nectar of life. As explained in the Second Chapter, the living entity is
eternal. This is also confirmed here. There is no specific date at which the
jīva was born. Nor can anyone trace out the history of jīvātmā’s manifestation
from the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedic literature
confirms this: na jāyate mṛjayate vā vipaścit. The knower of the body is never
born and never dies, and he is full of knowledge. The Supreme Lord is also
stated in the Vedic literature as pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ. The Supreme
Lord as the Supersoul is the chief knower of the body, and He is the master of
the three modes of material nature. In the smṛti it is said: dāsa-bhūto harer
eva nānyasvaiva kadācana. The living entities are eternally in the service of
the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by Lord Caitanya in His teaching;
therefore the description of Brahman mentioned in this verse is in relation to
the individual soul, and when the word Brahman is applied to the living entity,
it is to be understood that he is vijñānaṁ brahma as opposed to ananta-brahma.
Ananta-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.

### 13.14


sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat

sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukham

sarvataḥ śrutimal loke

sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati

sarvataḥ—everywhere; pāṇi—hands; pādam—legs; tat—that; sarvataḥ—everywhere;
akṣi—eyes; śiraḥ—head; mukham—face; sarvataḥ—everywhere; śrutimat—hearing;
loke—in the world; sarvam—everywhere, āvṛtya—covering; tiṣṭhati—exists.

**TRANSLATION**

Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes and faces, and He hears everything.
In this way the Supersoul exists.

**PURPORT**

As the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul, or
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form, and in Him
exist all the individual living entities, beginning from the first great
teacher, Brahmā, down to the small ants. There are unlimited heads, legs, hands
and eyes, and unlimited living entities. All are existing in and on the
Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul is all-pervading. The individual soul,
however, cannot say that he has his hands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is not
possible. If he thinks that although under ignorance he is not conscious that
his hands and legs are diffused all over, but when he attains to proper
knowledge he will come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means
that the individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, is not
supreme. The Supreme is different from the individual soul. The Supreme Lord can
extend His hand without limit; the individual soul cannot. In Bhagavad-gītā the
Lord says that if anyone offers Him a flower, or a fruit, or a little water, He
accepts. If the Lord is a far distance away, how can He accept things? This is
the omnipotence of the Lord: even though He is situated in His own abode, far,
far away from earth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone offers. That
is His potency. In the Brahmā-saṁhitā it is stated, goloka eva nivasati:
although He is always engaged in pastimes in His transcendental planet, He is
all-pervading. The individual soul cannot claim that he is all-pervading.
Therefore this verse describes the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, not
the individual soul.

### 13.15


sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ

sarvendriya-vivarjitam

asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc caiva

nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca

sarve—all; indriya—senses; guṇa—qualities; ābhāsam—original source; sarva—all;
indriya—senses; vivarjitam—being without; asaktam—without attachment;
sarva-bhṛt—maintainer of everyone; ca—also; eva—certainly; nirguṇam—without
material qualities; guṇa-bhoktṛ—simultaneously master of the guṇas; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses. He
is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He transcends
the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all modes of
material nature.

**PURPORT**

The Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living entities,
doesn’t have material senses like they have. Actually, the individual souls have
spiritual senses, but in condemned life they are covered with the material
elements and therefore the sense activities are exhibited through matter. The
Supreme Lord’s senses are not so covered. His senses are transcendental and are
therefore called nirguṇa. Guṇa means the material modes, but His senses are
without material covering. It should be understood that His senses are not
exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensual activities, He
has His transcendental senses which are uncontaminated. This is very nicely
explained in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad in the verse: sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādam. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead has no hands which are materially contaminated,
but He has His hands and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is
the distinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no
material eyes, but He has eyes—otherwise how could He see? He sees everything,
past, present and future. He lives within the heart of the living being, and He
knows what we have done in the past, what we are doing now, and what is awaiting
us in the future. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā: He knows everything,
but no one knows Him. It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but
He can travel throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words,
the Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything else,
and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also have these
things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not contaminated by material
nature.

Bhagavad-gītā also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He is by
His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the material energy because He
is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic literature we find that His whole
embodiment is spiritual. He has His eternal form called sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha.
He is full of all opulence. He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of
all energy. He is the most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some
of the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is maintainer of all
living entities and the witness of all activities. As far as we can understand
from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is always transcendental. Although we do
not see His head, face, hands, or legs, He has them, and when we are elevated to
the transcendental situation then we can see the Lord’s form. Due to materially
contaminated senses, we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists who
are still materially affected cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.

### 13.16


bahir antaś ca bhūtānām

acaraṁ caram eva ca

sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ

dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat

bahiḥ—outside; antaḥ—inside; ca—also; bhūtānām—of all living entities;
acaram—not moving; caram—moving; eva—also; ca—and; sūkṣmatvāt—on account of
being subtle; tat—that; avijñeyam—unknowable; dūrasthaṁ—far away; ca antike—near
also; ca—and; tat—that.

**TRANSLATION**

The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving and
nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or to know.
Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

**PURPORT**

In Vedic literature we understand that Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Person, is residing
both outside and inside of every living entity. He is present both in the
spiritual and material world. Although He is far, far away, still He is near to
us. These are the statements of Vedic literature. Āsīno dūraṁ vrajati śayāno
yāti sarvataḥ. And, because He is always engaged in transcendental bliss, we
cannot understand how He is enjoying His full opulence. We cannot see or
understand with these material senses. Therefore in the Vedic language it is
said that to understand Him our material mind and senses cannot act. But one who
has purified his mind and senses by practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional
service can see Him constantly. It is confirmed in Brahmā-saṁhitā that the
devotee who has developed love for the Supreme God can see Him always, without
cessation. And it is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (11.54) that He can be seen and
understood only by devotional service. Bhaktyā tvananyayā śakyaḥ.

### 13.17


avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu

vibhaktam iva ca sthitam

bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ

grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca

avibhaktam—without division; ca—also; bhūteṣu—in every living being;
vibhaktam—divided; iva—as if; ca—also; sthitam—situated; bhūta-bhartṛ—maintainer
of all living entities; ca—also; tat—that; jñeyam—to be understood;
grasiṣṇu—devours; prabhaviṣṇu—develops; ca—also.

**TRANSLATION**

Although the Supersoul appears to be divided, He is never divided. He is
situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living entity, it is to
be understood that He devours and develops all.

**PURPORT**

The Lord is situated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Does that mean that
He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example is given of the sun:
the sun, at the meridian, is situated in his place. But if one goes for five
thousand miles in all directions and asks, “Where is the sun?” everyone will say
that it is shining on his head. In the Vedic literature this example is given to
show that although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is
said in Vedic literature that one Viṣṇu is present everywhere by His
omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons. And the
Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity, devours everything
at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed in the Eleventh Chapter when the
Lord said that He has come to devour all the warriors assembled at Kurukṣetra.
He also mentions that in the form of time He devours also. He is the
annihilator, the killer of all. When there is creation, He develops all from
their original state, and at the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic
hymns confirm the fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest
of al1. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and after
annihilation, everything again returns to rest in Him. These are the
confirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante yena jātāni jīvanti
yat prayanty abhisaṁviśanti tad brahma tad vijijñāsasva. (Taittirīya Upaniṣad,
3.1)

### 13.18


jyotiṣām api taj jyotis

tamasaḥ param ucyate

jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ

hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam

jyotiṣām—in all luminous objects; api—also; tat—that; jyotiḥ—source of light;
tamasaḥ—of the darkness; param—beyond; ucyate—is said; jñānam—knowledge;
jñeyam—to be known; jñāna-gamyam—to be approached by knowledge; hṛdi—in the
heart; sarvasya—of everyone; viṣṭhitam—situated.

**TRANSLATION**

He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of
matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge, and
He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.

**PURPORT**

The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of light in all
luminous objects like the sun, moon, stars, etc. In the Vedic literature we find
that in the spiritual kingdom there is no need of sun or moon because the
effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. In the material world that brahmajyoti
the Lord’s spiritual effulgence, is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material
elements; therefore in this material world we require the assistance of sun,
moon, electricity, etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need
of such things. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because of His
luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear, therefore, that His
situation is not in the material world. He is situated in the spiritual world
which is far, far away in the spiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic
literature. Āditya-varṇam tamasaḥ parastāt. He is just like the sun, eternally
luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness of this material world. His
knowledge is transcendental. The Vedic literature confirms that Brahman is
concentrated transcendental knowledge. To one who is anxious to be transferred
to that spiritual world, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord who is situated
in everyone’s heart.

One Vedic mantra says: taṁ ha devam ātma-buddhi-prakāśaṁ mumukṣur vai śaraṇam
aham prapadye. One must surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he
at all wants liberation. As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned,
it is also confirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva viditvātimṛtyum eti. “Only by
knowing You can one surpass the boundary of birth and death.” He is situated in
everyone’s heart as the supreme controller. The Supreme has legs and hands
distributed everywhere, and this cannot be said of the individual soul.
Therefore that there are two knowers of the field of activity, the individual
soul and the Supersoul, must be admitted. One’s hands and legs are distributed
locally, but Kṛṣṇa’s hands and legs are distributed everywhere. This is
confirmed in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad: sarvasya prabhum īśānaṁ sarvasya śaraṇaṁ
bṛhat. That Supreme Personality of Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu or master
of all living entities; therefore He is the ultimate center of all living
entities. So there is no denying the fact that the Supreme Supersoul and the
individual soul are always different.
