### 13.25


dhyānenātmani paśyanti

kecid ātmānam ātmanā

anye sāṅkhyena yogena

karma-yogena cāpare

dhyānena—by meditation; ātmani—self; paśyanti—see; kecit—one; ātmānam—Supersoul;
ātmanā—by the mind; anye—others; sāṅkhyena—by philosophical discussion;
yogena—by the yoga system; karma-yogena—by activities without fruitive desire;
ca—also; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

That Supersoul is perceived by some through meditation, by some through the
cultivation of knowledge, and by others through working without fruitive desire.

PURPORT

The Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned soul can be divided into two
classes as far as man’s search for self-realization is concerned. Those who are
atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense of spiritual
understanding. But there are others who are faithful in their understanding of
spiritual life, and they are called workers who have renounced fruitive results.
Those who always try to establish the doctrine of monism are also counted among
the atheists and agnostics. In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are really capable of spiritual understanding because
they understand that beyond this material nature there is the spiritual world
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded as the Paramātmā, the
Supersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there are those who
try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation of knowledge, and
they can be counted in the second class. The atheistic philosophers analyze this
material world into twenty-four elements, and they place the individual soul as
the twenty-fifth item. When they are able to understand the nature of the
individual soul to be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to
understand also that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also come to the
standard of devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Those who work without
fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. They are given a chance to
advance to the platform of devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Here it is
stated that there are some people who are pure in consciousness and who try to
find out the Supersoul by meditation, and when they discover the Supersoul
within themselves, they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are
others who also try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge,
and there are others who cultivate the haṭha-yoga system and who try to satisfy
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.

### 13.26


anye tv evam ajānantaḥ

śrutvānyebhya upāsate

te ’pi cātitaranty eva

mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ

anye—others; tu—but; evam—this; ajānantaḥ—without spiritual knowledge; śrutvā—by
hearing; anyebhyaḥ—from others; upāsate—begin to worship; te—they; api—also;
ca—and; atitaranti—transcend; eva—certainly; mṛtyum—the path of death;
śruti-parāyaṇāḥ—inclined to the process of hearing.

TRANSLATION

Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge, begin
to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others. Because of
their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path of birth
and death.

PURPORT

This verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in modern
society there is practically no education in spiritual matters. Some of the
people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic or philosophical, but actually
there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for the common man, if he is a good
soul, then there is a chance for advancement by hearing. This hearing process is
very important. Lord Caitanya, who preached Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the modern
world, gave great stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears from
authoritative sources, he can progress, especially, according to Lord Caitanya,
if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. It is stated, therefore,
that all men should take advantage of hearing from realized souls and gradually
become able to understand everything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then
undoubtedly take place. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to
change his position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand the
Absolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become the servant
of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is fortunate enough to
take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him about self-realization and follow
in his footsteps, he will be gradually elevated to the position of a pure
devotee. In this verse particularly the process of hearing is strongly
recommended, and this is very appropriate. Although the common man is often not
as capable as so-called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative
person will help one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead,
back to home.

### 13.27


yāvat sañjāyate kiñcit

sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam

kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt

tad viddhi bharatarṣabha

yāvat—whatever; saṁjāyate—takes place; kiñcit—anything; sattvam—existence;
sthāvara—not moving; jaṅgamam—moving; kṣetra—the body; kṣetrajña—knower of the
body; saṁyogāt—union between; tat viddhi—you must know it; bharatarṣabha—O chief
of the Bhāratas.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bhāratas, whatever you see in existence, both moving and
unmoving, is only the combination of the field of activities and the knower of
the field.

PURPORT

Both material nature and the living entity, which were existing before the
creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever is created is but
a combination of the living entity and material nature. There are many
manifestations like trees, mountains and hills, which are not moving, and there
are many existences which are moving, and all of them are but combinations of
material nature and superior nature, the living entity. Without the touch of the
superior nature, the living entity, nothing can grow. Therefore the relationship
between matter and nature is eternally going on, and this combination is
effected by the Supreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of both the
superior and inferior natures. The material nature is created by Him, and the
superior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all these activities
and manifestations take place.

### 13.28


samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram

vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ

yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati

samam—equally; sarveṣu—in all; bhūteṣu—living entities; tiṣṭhantam—residing;
parameśvaram—the Supersoul; vinaśyatsu—in the destructible; avinaśyantam—not
destroyed; yaḥ—anyone; paśyati—see; saḥ—he; paśyati—actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies and
who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul is ever destroyed,
actually sees.

PURPORT

Anyone who can see three things—the body, the proprietor of the body, or
individual soul, and the friend of the individual soul, combined together by
good association—is actually in knowledge. Those who are not associated with the
soul’s friend are ignorant; they simply see the body, and when the body is
destroyed they think that everything is finished, but actually it is not so.
After the destruction of the body, both the soul and the Supersoul exist, and
they go on eternally in many various moving and unmoving forms. The Sanskrit
word parameśvaram is sometimes translated as the individual soul because the
soul is the master of the body, and after the destruction of the body he
transfers to another form. In that way he is master. But there are others who
interpret this parameśvaram to be the Supersoul. In either case, both the
Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not destroyed. One who can
see in this way can actually see what is happening.

### 13.29


samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra

samavasthitam īśvaram

na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ

tato yāti parāṁ gatim

samam—equally; paśyan—seeing; hi—certainly; sarvatra—everywhere;
samavasthitam—equally situated; īśvaram—Supersoul; na—does not; hinasti—degrade;
ātmanā—by the mind; ātmānam—the soul; tataḥ yāti—then reaches; parām—the
transcendental; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul in every living being and equal everywhere does not
degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.

PURPORT

The living entity, by accepting his material existence as just so much
suffering, can become situated in his spiritual existence. If one understands
that the Supreme is situated in His Paramātmā manifestation everywhere, that is,
if one can see the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every
living thing, he does not degrade himself, and he therefore gradually advances
in the spiritual world. The mind is generally addicted to self-centered
processes; but when the mind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in
spiritual understanding.

### 13.30


prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi

kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ

yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam

akartāraṁ sa paśyati

prakṛtyā—material nature; eva—certainly; ca—also; karmāṇi—activities;
kriyamāṇāni—engaged in performing; sarvaśaḥ—in all respects; yaḥ—anyone who;
paśyati—sees; tathā—also; ātmānam—himself; akartāram—non-doer; saḥ—he;
paśyati—sees perfectly.

TRANSLATION

One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is created
of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

PURPORT

This body is made by material nature under the direction of the Supersoul, and
whatever activities are going on in respect to one’s body are not his doing.
Whatever one is supposed to do, either for happiness or for distress, one is
forced to do because of the bodily constitution. The self, however, is outside
all these bodily activities. This body is given according to one’s past desires.
To fulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.
Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme Lord, to
fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficult circumstances to
suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of the living entity, when
developed, makes one separate from bodily activities. One who has such a vision
is an actual seer.

### 13.31


yadā bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam

eka-stham anupaśyati

tata eva ca vistāraṁ

brahma sampadyate tadā

yadā—when; bhūta—living entities; pṛthak-bhāvam—separated entities;
eka-stham—situated in one; anupaśyati—tries to see through authority; tataḥ
eva—thereafter; ca—also; vistāram—expanded; brahma—the Absolute;
sampadyate—attains; tadā—at that time.

TRANSLATION

When a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due to
different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception. Thus he sees
that beings are expanded everywhere.

PURPORT

When one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due to the
different desires of the individual soul and do not actually belong to the soul
itself, one actually sees. In the material conception of life, we find someone a
demigod, someone a human being, a dog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not
actual vision. This material differentiation is due to a material conception of
life. After the destruction of the material body, this spirit soul is one. The
spirit soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different types of
bodies. When one can see this, he attains spiritual vision; thus being freed
from differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., one becomes beautified
in his consciousness and able to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness in his spiritual
identity. How he then sees things will be explained in the next verse.

### 13.32


anāditvān nirguṇatvāt

paramātmāyam avyayaḥ

śarīra-stho ’pi kaunteya

na karoti na lipyate

anāditvāt—due to eternity; nirguṇatvāt—due to transcendental; param—beyond
material nature; ātmā—spirit; ayam—this; avyayaḥ—inexhaustable; śarīra-sthaḥ
api—though dwelling in the body; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; na karoti—never does
anything; na lipyate—nor is he entangled.

TRANSLATION

Those with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is transcendental,
eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact with the material body,
O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor is entangled.

PURPORT

A living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material body,
but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and in spite of his
being situated in a material body, he is transcendental and eternal. Thus he
cannot be destroyed. By nature he is full of bliss. He does not engage himself
in any material activities; therefore the activities performed due to his
contact with material bodies do not entangle him.

