### 13.33


yathā sarva-gataṁ saukṣmyād

ākāśaṁ nopalipyate

sarvatrāvasthito dehe

tathātmā nopalipyate

yathā—as; sarva-gatam—all-pervading; saukṣmyāt—due to being subtle; ākāśam—the
sky; na—never; upalipyate—mixes; sarvatra—everywhere; avasthitaḥ—situated;
dehe—in the body; tathā—such; ātmā—the self; na—never; upalipyate—mixes.

TRANSLATION

The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is
all-pervading. Similarly, the soul, situated in Brahman vision, does not mix
with the body, though situated in that body.

PURPORT

The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still it does
not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, even though situated in
varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his subtle nature. Therefore it
is impossible to see with the material eyes how the living entity is in contact
with this body and how he is out of it after the destruction of the body. No one
in science can ascertain this.

### 13.34


yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ

kṛtsnaṁ lokam imaṁ raviḥ

kṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ

prakāśayati bhārata

yathā—as; prakāśayati—illuminates; ekaḥ—one; kṛtsnam—the whole; lokam—universe;
imam—this; raviḥ—the sun, kṣetram—this body; kṣetrī—the soul; tathā—similarly;
kṛtsnam—all; prakāśayati—illuminates; bhārata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the
living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.

PURPORT

There are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-gītā the
example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun is situated in one
place, but is illuminating the whole universe, so a small particle of spirit
soul, although situated in the heart of this body, is illuminating the whole
body by consciousness. Thus consciousness is the proof of the presence of the
soul, as sunshine or light is the proof of the presence of the sun.

When the soul is present in the body, there is consciousness all over the body,
and as soon as the soul has passed from the body, there is no more
consciousness. This can be easily understood by any intelligent man. Therefore
consciousness is not a production of the combinations of matter. It is the
symptom of the living entity. The consciousness of the living entity, although
qualitatively one with the supreme consciousness, is not supreme because the
consciousness of one particular body does not share that of another body. But
the Supersoul, which is situated in all bodies as the friend of the individual
soul, is conscious of all bodies. That is the difference between supreme
consciousness and individual consciousness.

### 13.35


kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam

antaraṁ jñāna-cakṣuṣā

bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣaṁ ca

ye vidur yānti te param

kṣetra—body; kṣetrajñayoḥ—of the proprietor of the body; evam—that;
antaram—difference; jñāna-cakṣuṣā—by vision of knowledge; bhūta—living entity;
prakṛti—material nature; mokṣam—liberation; ca—also; ye—one who; viduḥ—knows;
yānti—approaches; te—they; param—Supreme.

TRANSLATION

One who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner of the
body and can understand the process of liberation from this bondage, also
attains to the supreme goal.

PURPORT

The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the distinction
between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul. A faithful person
should at first have some good association to hear of God and thus gradually
become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual master, he can learn to
distinguish between matter and spirit, and that becomes the steppingstone for
further spiritual realization. A spiritual master teaches his students to get
free from the material concept of life by various instructions. For instance, in
Bhagavad-gītā we find Kṛṣṇa instructing Arjuna to free him from materialistic
considerations.

One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed with its
twenty-four elements. That is the gross manifestation. And the subtle
manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the symptoms of life
are the interaction of these features. But over and above this, there is the
soul, and there is also the Supersoul. The soul and the Supersoul are two. This
material world is working by the conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four
material elements. One who can see the constitution of the whole material
manifestation as this combination of the soul and material elements and also can
see the situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the
spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for realization,
and one should have a complete understanding of this chapter with the help of
the spiritual master.


The Three Modes of Material Nature

### 14.1


śrī-bhagavān uvāca

paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi

jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam

yaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve

parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ

śrī bhagavān uvāca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
param—transcendental; bhūyaḥ—again; pravakṣyāmi—I shall speak; jñānānām—of all
knowledge; jñānam—knowledge; uttamam—the supreme; yat—which; jñātvā—knowing;
munayaḥ—the sages; sarve—all; parām—transcendental; siddhim—perfection;
itaḥ—from this world; gatāḥ—attain.

TRANSLATION

The Blessed Lord said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme wisdom, the
best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have attained to supreme
perfection.

PURPORT

From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa in detail
reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now, the Lord
Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If one understands this chapter through
the process of philosophical speculation, he will come to an understanding of
devotional service. In the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by
humbly developing knowledge one may possibly be freed from material
entanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to association with the
modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this material world. Now,
in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explains what those modes of nature
are, how they act, how they bind and how they give liberation. The knowledge
explained in this chapter is proclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to
the knowledge given so far in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge,
various great sages attain perfection and transfer to the spiritual world. The
Lord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge is far, far
superior to all other processes of knowledge thus far explained, and knowing
this many attain perfection. Thus it is expected that one who understands this
Fourteenth Chapter will attain perfection.

### 14.2


idaṁ jñānam upāśritya

mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ

sarge ’pi nopajāyante

pralaye na vyathanti ca

idam—this; jñānam—knowledge; upāśritya—taking shelter of; mama—My;
sādharmyam—nature; āgatāḥ—attain; sarge api—even in the creation; na—never;
upajāyante—comes in; pralaye—in the annihilation; na—nor; vyathanti—disturbed;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental
nature, which is like My own nature. Thus established, one is not born at the
time of creation nor disturbed at the time of dissolution.

PURPORT

After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires qualitative
equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming free from the
repetition of birth and death. One does not, however, lose his identity as an
individual soul. It is understood from Vedic literature that the liberated souls
who have reached the transcendental planets of the spiritual sky always look to
the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving
service. So, even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individual
identities.

Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is contaminated by
the three modes of material nature. But knowledge which is not contaminated by
the three modes of nature is called transcendental knowledge. As soon as one is
situated in that transcendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as that of
the Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold that
after being freed from the material activities of the material form, this
spiritual identity becomes formless, without any variegatedness. However, just
as there is material variegatedness in this world, so, in the spiritual world,
there is also variegatedness. Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual
existence is opposed to material variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky,
one attains spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritual
situation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to be
uncontaminated, and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord. To
obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities. One who
thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by the creation or
the destruction of the material world.

### 14.3


mama yonir mahad brahma

tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham

sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tato bhavati bhārata

mama—My; yoniḥ—source of birth; mahat—the total material existence;
brahma—supreme; tasmin—in that; garbham—pregnancy; dadhāmi—create; aham—I;
sambhavaḥ—possibility; sarva-bhūtānām—of all living entities; tataḥ—thereafter;
bhavati—becomes; bhārata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is
that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings,
O son of Bharata.

PURPORT

This is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due to the
combination of kṣetra and kṣetrajña, the body and the spirit soul. This
combination of material nature and the living entity is made possible by the
Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total cause of the total cosmic
manifestation, and because in the total substance of the material cause there
are three modes of nature, it is sometimes called Brahman. The Supreme
Personality impregnates that total substance, and thus innumerable universes
become possible. This total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described
as Brahman in the Vedic literature: tasmād etad brahma nāma-rūpam annaṁ ca
jāyate. Into that Brahman the seeds of the living entities are impregnated by
the Supreme Person. The twenty-four elements, beginning from earth, water, fire
and air, are all material energy, called Mahā-brahman, or the great Brahman, the
material nature. As is explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is
another, superior nature—the living entity. In material nature the superior
nature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
thereafter all living entities are born of this material nature.

The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the
scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of the scorpion.
Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly, material nature is not
the cause of the birth of the living entities. The seed is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and they only seem to come out as products of material
nature. Thus every living entity, according to his past activities, has a
different body, created by this material nature, and the entity can enjoy or
suffer according to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the
manifestations of living entities in this material world.

### 14.4


sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

sarva-yoniṣu—in all species of life; kaunteya—O son of Kuntī; mūrtayaḥ—forms;
sambhavanti—as they appear; yāḥ—which; tāsām—all of them; brahma—supreme; mahat
yoniḥ—the source of birth in the material substance; aham—Myself;
bīja-pradaḥ—seed-giving; pitā—father.

TRANSLATION

It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kuntī, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa, is the original father of all living entities. The living entities are
combinations of the material nature and the spiritual nature. Such living
entities are seen not only on this planet, but in every planet, even in the
highest where Brahmā is situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within
the earth there are living entities, even within water and within fire. All
these appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Kṛṣṇa’s
seed-giving process. The purport is that the living entities, being impregnated
in the material world, come out and form at the time of creation according to
their past deeds.
